BANK OF XYZ EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY


BANK OF XYZ EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY

[Under Section 21 of Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, Rules, 2017]
1. Preamble:

1.1 The Constitution of XYZ mandates equality, freedom, justice and dignity of all individuals and implicitly mandates an inclusive society for all including persons with disabilities. With regard to persons with disabilities, it has been the consistent focus of government legislations to ensure that persons with disabilities enjoy equal opportunities for leading a better quality of life.

1.2 The Government of XYZ enacted 'The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016' (ACT No.49 of 2016) to give effect to United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. In terms of Section 21 of the 'The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016', every establishment is mandated to notify Equal Opportunity Policy detailing measures proposed to be taken by it in pursuance of the provisions of Chapter IV of the Act of 2016 in the manner as prescribed by the Central Government.

1.3 Bank of XYZ, (hereafter referred to as the 'Bank') founded on 07th September, 1906 is a leading Public Sector Bank in XYZ, headquartered at ABC. The Bank is committed to strict compliance of Government of XYZ instructions as are advised from time to time, for empowerment of persons with disabilities (PWD). It has been the endeavour of the Bank to eliminate any form of discrimination and ensure equality, freedom, justice and dignity to all individuals including persons with disabilities and maintain conducive and harmonious work environment to guarantee that the persons with disabilities enjoy equality, dignity and respect at par with all others. By doing so, the Bank is empowered and better equipped to develop and deliver services to its customers- both internal and external and thus achieve business excellence.

1.4 In compliance of the letter and spirit of the provisions of 'The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 and Rules, 2017, as mandated under Section 21 of the said Act/ Rules, Bank of XYZ, adopted its Equal Opportunity Policy.

1.5 Bank shall not discriminate against any person with disability in any matter relating to employment. It shall ensure an accessible environment and availability of assistive devices and shall put in place proper systems and processes to enable the persons with disabilities to effectively discharge their duties in the Bank.

1.6 The Chief General Manager/ General Manager- Human Resources, Head Office shall be the designated authority with overall responsibility for the effective operation and implementation of the Equal Opportunity Policy. He/ she shall be authorised to lay down/ implement operational guidelines issued by the Government of XYZ for betterment of

persons with disabilities as given in 'The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016/ Rules.'

1.7 This Policy will be available to all concerned in Bank's official website.

1.8 It shall be the responsibility of every member of the Bank to implement this policy. Any employee who violates this Policy, or in any manner discriminates against any person with disability or commits any act of harassment to such person shall be construed as having committed an act of misconduct liable to be dealt with as per Bank's laid down rules.

1.9 The H.R. Department of the Zones shall have the functional responsibility to ensure compliance of the policy.
2. Scope:

2.1 This policy shall cover all employees with disabilities, including job applicants, trainees, contractual employees and shall cover all those employees who acquire disability during their work tenure. It shall also cover the customers of the Bank.

2.2 This policy shall apply to all aspects of employment including recruitment, training, working conditions, transfers, posting, promotion and employee benefits and allowances.

3. For Employees with Disability:

3.1 In compliance with the laid down provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 and Rules thereof, it is the Bank's responsibility to ensure that the work environment is free from any form of discrimination against persons with disabilities.

3.2 The Bank shall take appropriate action, as deemed fit, to ensure that a conducive environment is provided to employees with disabilities to perform their roles and excel in doing so.

3.3 Bank shall not discriminate against any employee in any matter relating to employment in as much as :
3.3.1 Reservation in appointments and the manner for recruitment shall be as stipulated by the Government from time to time for the posts meant to be filled for Persons with Disabilities. Roster Registers in stipulated formats shall be maintained for Persons with Disabilities.

3.3.2 In case when in any recruitment year any vacancy cannot be filled up due to non-availability of suitable person with benchmark disability or for any other

sufficient reasons, such vacancy shall be carried forward in the succeeding recruitment year and if in the succeeding recruitment year also suitable person with benchmark disability is not available, it may first be filled by interchange among the five categories and only when there is no person with disability available for the post in that year, the employer shall fill up the vacancy by appointment of a person, other than a person with disability.
3.3.3 The manner of selection of persons with disabilities for various posts, preference in transfer and posting, special leave, allowances and vacancies shall be governed by the guidelines issued by the Government from time to time.
3.3.4 No promotion shall be denied to a person merely on the ground of disability. Post-recruitment and pre-promotion training shall be imparted to employees with disability. Further, employee with disabilities are encouraged to attend trainings as and when required to enhance their capabilities/ competencies to enable them to effectively discharge their duties in the bank.

3.3.5 Bank shall strive to give convenient posting to the employee with disability. The requests of employees with disabilities in transfer/ posting shall be supportively considered to the extent possible for optimally utilising their services subject to administrative constraints.

3.3.6 Bank shall not dispense with or reduce in rank, an employee who acquires a disability (except in case of certified total incapacitation) during his or her service:

3.3.6.1 Provided that, if an employee after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he/ she was holding, shall be shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service benefits:
3.3.6.2 Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he may be kept on a supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier.

3.3.7 Bank shall ensure a barrier free and conducive environment, with provision for assistive devices to employees with disability.

3.3.8 Any violation of this Policy, i.e., if any person with disability feels discriminated against or has not been provided with reasonable opportunity or has been denied access to any facility to which he/ she is entitled to under Bank's rules and regulations shall be regarded as a grievance arising out of this policy. An employee with disability who is aggrieved under the provisions of this Policy may file a grievance/ complaint with the Grievance Redressal

Officer, authorised to act as so by the Bank, who shall look into the matter for corrective action, as warranted.

3.3.9 The Grievance Redressal Officer shall maintain a Register of complaints. Such complaint will be dealt with as per Bank's laid down Grievance Redressal Policy and every complaint shall be inquired into within a time period of two weeks of its registration.

3.3.10 The Liaison Officer at Head Office who is authorised by the Bank to look after the matters pertaining to reservation of SC/ST/OBC shall also function as the Nodal Officer for matters relating to employees with disabilities.
3.3.11 All forms of records/ documents emanating from this Policy shall be open to inspection at all reasonable hours by such persons as may be authorised on their behalf by the appropriate Government.
4. For Customers with Disabilities (Other than Staff) :

4.1 The Bank shall render all possible assistance to any person with disability including the visually challenged for availing various banking facilities.
4.1.1 Dedicated Counters/ Preference to Differently abled persons:
The Bank shall provide a separate and clearly identifiable dedicated counter in branches/ offices or a counter which shall provide priority to people who are differently abled including visually impaired persons. In this regard, branches/ offices will make two separate queues - one for the persons who are differently abled including visually impaired persons and another line for other general customers/ persons.

4.1.2 Ease of filing form 15 G/H:
Bank provides form 15 G/ 15H to differently abled persons, once in a year (preferably in April) to enable them to submit the same, where applicable, within the stipulated time. All branches shall accept Form 15G/H of differently abled persons.
4.1.3 Accounts of visually Impaired Persons:

4.1.3.1 Bank provides Banking facilities to visually impaired persons in opening an account. Visually impaired person may open the account either singly/ jointly with any person of his/ her choice whom he/ she considers reliable and who may be competent to contract and who should not be visually impaired person. However, mode of operation in such accounts shall be 1st named account holder. The rules of business, terms and conditions are to be read out by the branch in the presence of a witness known to the branch and a branch official other than a paying cashier.

4.1.3.2 The Bank shall render all possible assistance to the visually challenged for availing various banking facilities. In addition to the above, magnifying glasses are also to be provided by all bank branches for the use of persons with low vision, wherever they require for carrying out banking transactions with ease. The branches should display at a prominent place notice about the availability of magnifying glasses and other facilities available for persons with disabilities.

4.1.3.3 Additional facilities to visually impaired customers:
The facilities provided to sick/ old / incapacitated persons (regarding operations of accounts through identification of thumb/ toe impression/ mark by two independent witnesses and authorizing a person who would withdraw the amount on behalf of such customers) shall also be extended to the visually impaired customers by the branches.

4.1.4 Saving Bank Account of Old/ Incapacitated Persons:

With a view to enabling the old/sick/incapacitated account holders to operate their bank accounts, branches will follow the under noted procedure:

4.1.4.1 Wherever thumb or toe impression of such customers is obtained on the cheque/ withdrawal slip, the same should be identified by two independent witnesses, known to the bank, one of whom should be an officer of the branch.

4.1.4.2 Whenever the customer cannot even put his/ her thumb impression, toe impression may be taken in lieu of thumb impression.

4.1.4.3 The customer should also be asked to indicate to the branch as to who would withdraw the amount from the branch on his/her behalf and he/she should provide a letter of authorization in that regard, which should also be witnessed by two independent witnesses one of whom should be an officer of the branch.
4.1.4.4 Such authorized representative shall have to put his signature on the reverse of cheque/ withdrawal slip in token of having received the amount along with his acknowledgement in this regard.

4.1.4.5 Any medical certificate received/ submitted in this connection will be additional evidence but not a substitute to the procedure, detailed above.


4.1.5 Ramps at the entrance of branches/ offices:
Bank will provide Ramps at the entrance of branches/ offices, wherever possible, so that the persons with disabilities / wheel chair users can enter the bank branches and conduct business without much difficulty.

4.1.6 Tactile guide paths & Lift Braille buttons:
To facilitate orientation of persons with visual impairment, Bank shall make arrangements for tactile guide paths and Lift Braille buttons.

4.1.7 Door Step Banking:
In view of the difficulties faced by differently abled or infirm persons (having medically certified chronic illness or disability) including those who are visually impaired, Bank shall provide basic banking facilities, such as pick up of cash and instruments against receipt, delivery of cash against withdrawal from account, delivery of demand drafts, submission of Know Your Customer (KYC) documents and Life certificate at the premises/ residence of such customers.

4.2 To improve web accessibility for persons who are visually impaired to enable them to perceive, understand, navigate, interact with, and contribute to the web, we propose to design and, thereby, introduce websites and apps incorporating appropriate design/ colour/ fonts and text-to-speech features.

4.3 Any customer with disability excluding employees of the Bank aggrieved with the above provisions mentioned under para 4 may file a complaint with the Grievance Redressal Officer, who shall look into the matter for corrective action. Complaint will be dealt with as per Grievance Redressal policy of the Bank.

4.4 The Policy will be reviewed after three years except in light of any statutory requirement. Notwithstanding, the Bank reserves the right to review, modify and amend the policy whenever deemed necessary.

**********

Bank's Model Policy on Collection of Cheques / Instruments & Dishonour of Instruments
1. Introduction:
Keeping in view the technological progress in payment and settlement systems and the qualitative changes in operational systems and processes that have been undertaken by a number of banks, the Reserve Bank of XYZ had, with effect from 1st November 2004, withdrawn its earlier instructions to commercial banks on (i) Immediate Credit of local / outstation cheques,
(ii) Time Frame for Collection of Local / Outstation Instruments and (iii) Interest Payment for Delayed Collection.
The withdrawal of these mandatory guidelines was expected to enable market forces of competition to come into play to improve efficiencies in collection of cheques and other instruments. This collection policy of the Bank is a reflection of our on-going efforts to provide better service to our customers and set higher standards for performance.
The policy is based on principles of transparency and fairness in the treatment of customers. The bank is committed to increased use of technology to provide quick collection services to its customers.
This policy document covers the following aspects -
* Collection of cheques and other instruments payable at centres within XYZ and abroad.
* Our commitment regarding time norms for collection of instruments.
* Policy on payment of interest in cases where the bank fails to meet time norms for realization of proceeds of outstation instruments.
* Our policy on dealing with collection instruments lost in transit.
* Availability of option of Positive Pay to customers.
2. Objective of Policy
* To safeguard the customers' interest and avoid possible dispute and time taken in settlement of such disputes.
* To stop physical movement of cheques and replacement of physical instrument by image of instrument and the corresponding data contained in MICR Line.
* To reduce fraudulent cases related to clearing of cheques.
3. Arrangements for Collection:
3.1. Local Cheques
(a). All CTS Compliant Cheques and other Negotiable Instruments which are payable under a grid system will be presented through the clearing system prevailing at the centre. Cheques deposited at branch counters and in collection boxes within the branch premises before the specified cut-off time will be presented for clearing on the same day. The broad time limit / cut - off time for presenting of clearing will be decided by the respective branch head in consultation with Zonal Office based on location of branch / practices, etc. However, such cut-off time limit will be clearly indicated on cheque drop boxes located at branch premises.






Cheques deposited after the cut-off time and in collection boxes outside the branch premises including off-site ATMs will be presented in the next clearing cycle. As a policy, bank would give credit to the customer account on the day clearing settlement takes place. Withdrawal of amounts so credited would be permitted as per the cheque return schedule of the clearing house.
(b) Bank branches situated at centers which are not members of any CTS Grid or where no clearing house exists, would present local cheques on drawee banks across the counter and it would be the bank's endeavour to credit the proceeds at the earliest but not later than 3rd working day from the date of deposit by customer.
3.2. Outstation Cheques
(a) Cheques drawn on other banks at outstation centres other than those covered under 3.1 above, will normally be collected through bank's branches at those centres. Where the bank does not have a branch of its own, the instrument would be directly sent for collection to the drawee bank or collected through a correspondent bank.
(b) Cheques drawn on bank's own branches at outstation centres will be collected using the inter-branch arrangements in vogue. Branches which are connected through a centralized processing arrangement and are offering anywhere banking services to its customers will provide same day credit to its customers in respect of outstation instruments drawn on any of its branches in the CBS network if received in the branch up to specified time and latest by next working day if deposited / dropped in collection box outside the branch premises including the offsite ATMs.
3.3 CTS Cheques (Cheque Clearing Process under CTS based Clearing System)
Cheque truncation is the process of eliminating the flow of physical cheque issued by a drawer to the Drawee Branch. The physical cheques are truncated and electronic images of the cheques are captured for processing. The physical cheques are retained at the presenting bank itself. The captured image along with data is exchanged across the Banks.
3.3.1 Receiving payment based on an electronic image of truncated cheque:
> Legal status of the cheque transaction is derived from amendments made to the Negotiable instrument Act, 1881 by virtue of Negotiable Instruments {Amendments and Miscellaneous Provision) Act, 2002 whereby among others, the section 6,64, 81, 89 & 131 of the NI Act, 1881 are also suitably amended to incorporate the validity of the truncated image of the cheque.
  Cheque truncation system- Section 131 of Negotiable Instrument Act 1881 ( Amendments)
  Onus of due diligence shifted to the presenting bank in CTS environment
It shall be the duty of the bank who receives payment based on an electronic image of a truncated cheque held with him, to verify the prima facie genuineness of the cheque to be truncated and any fraud, forgery or tampering apparent on the face of the instrument that can be verified with due diligence and ordinary care as per the guidelines of the NI Act 1881, as amended from time to time.




> In view of the above amendment, the presenting bank takes responsibility for exercise of due diligence. The branches while sending cheques to CTS Scanning Center / Clearing Centre / Hub should ensure the following:
  To exercise due diligence on all instruments
  To check the apparent tenor of the instruments
  To ensure verification under Ultra Violet Lamp(UVL)
  To scrutinize the cheques for material alteration
  To ensure genuineness and validity of instruments
  To ensure that pay in slip is properly filled up with correct and complete account number and name of the account holder
  To ensure that the complete account number is written on the back of the cheque
/ instruments along with the mobile no. of the depositor.
> The scanning center/clearing center/hub while scanning the instruments should inter-alia also ensures the following:
  To check the apparent tenor and genuineness of the instruments
  To ensure verification of instruments under Ultra Violet Lamp (ULV)
  To ensure that instrument confirms to features of CTS 2010 standard
  To ensure that physical feel of the instrument meets the usual paper standard used for cheque.
  To ensure that no material alteration visible to naked eye
3.2.2 Our Branches issue only Payable at Par CTS Standard 2010 cheques to Customers
3.3.3 Cheque Truncation System (CTS) is presently working at ABC Grid at Delhi, ABC Grid in ABC and ABC Grid in ABC.
3.3.4 States covered in GRID based CTS-2010 centers:

Grid
Location
States Covered
Northern Grid
ABC
NCR of ABC, Haryana, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh , Uttarkhand, Bihar, Rajasthan, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand ,Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, Union Territory of Ladakh, and the Union Territory of Chandigarh
Southern Grid
ABC
Andhra	Pradesh,	Telangana,	Karnataka,	Kerala, Tamilnadu, Odisha, West Bengal, North Eastern States,
and the Union Territory of Puducherry.
Western Grid
ABC
Maharashtra,	Goa,	Gujarat,	Madhya	Pradesh	and Chhattisgarh.
3.4 Non-CTS cheques
Non CTS cheques will be presented in the clearing house at the prescribed intervals which is presently once in a month on second Wednesday of the month or as decided by RBI, from time to time. In certain categories of cheques, (subject to amendments in guidelines) or instruments demanded by the correspondent Bank or Image Quality Assessment (IQA) failure will be presented in physical form to the drawee Bank.






3.5 Cheques payable in Foreign Countries
Cheques payable at foreign centres where the bank has branch operations (or banking operations through a subsidiary, etc.) will be collected through that office. The services of correspondent banks will be utilized in country / centres where the correspondent has presence. Cheques drawn on foreign banks at centres where the bank or its correspondents do not have direct presence will be sent direct to the drawee bank with instructions to credit proceeds to the respective NOSTRO Account of the bank maintained with one of the correspondent banks.
The time norms for collection and return of the instruments, varies from country to country and place to place within the country where a 'hold period' is prescribed. The due date for providing credit is calculated from date of notional credit in NOSTRO account plus the hold period prescribed for the country.
Cooling / Hold Period


The Bank may consider providing upfront credit by purchasing the instrument, if the conduct of the account has been satisfactory in the past, for a charge at Bank's sole discretion.
The various articles as detailed in the International Chamber of Commerce, Uniform rules for collection (ICC-522) will be applicable for collection of cheques. The Customer instructing the





Bank to perform services shall be bound by and liable to indemnify the Bank against all obligations and responsibilities imposed by foreign laws and usages.
Customers depositing cheques drawn on foreign centers are expected to be aware of usage / practices and laws related to cheques collection prevailing in drawee countries. Suitable notice may be displayed at branches for this purpose.
The cheques sent for collection by the collecting Bank can be returned by the Banks located in any foreign country (after their presentation in clearing/collection) due to fraud / financial reasons. The fraudulent cheques can be returned by the Banks in Foreign countries at any time after their presentation.
 i) In case of returned cheques, no protection is available to the collecting Bank. Since the Foreign Bank recovers the amount of returned cheques earlier credited into account of collecting Bank by debiting its NOSTRO account, the collecting Bank will not be able to provide any compensation to the depositor for cheques returned on fraud / financial reasons.
ii) Further, the Bank has right to recover the proceeds of the cheques credited in depositor's account (at the ruling exchange rate equivalent to foreign currency amount debited by foreign bank to the NOSTRO account of the collecting Bank) along with the interest from the date of credit of proceeds till the date on which amount is recovered.
3.6 Discontinuation of the requirement of Paper to Follow (P2F) for State Government Cheques
a. As per RBI circular dated 20.06.2019, it has now been decided, to dispense with the current requirement of forwarding the paid State Government Cheques in Physical Form (Commonly known as P2F) to the State Government departments/ treasuries.
b. In Cheque Truncation System, the 'Drawee Bank' means the dealing branch of a bank accredited to a Ministry/Department/Treasury/Sub-Treasury on which the cheques are drawn. The 'presenting bank' means a branch of any bank where the cheques are presented for payment by the clients. Both the presenting banks and Drawee banks would continue to discharge their duties prescribed under various Acts/Regulations/Rules such as the Negotiable Instruments Act 1881, Bankers' Books Evidence Act 1891, Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing Houses, Procedural Guidelines for Cheque Truncation System etc. with respect to payment of cheques. The government cheques would henceforth be paid in CTS clearing solely based on their electronic images. The paid cheques in physical form would be retained by the presenting bank.
c. In case any Drawee bank desires to verify the government cheque in physical form before passing it for payment, the image would be returned unpaid under the reason "present with document". The presenting bank on such instances shall ensure that the instrument is presented again in the next applicable clearing session without any reference to the account holder (payee).
d. The presenting banks are required to preserve the physical instruments in their custody securely for a period of 10 years as required under Procedural Guidelines for CTS. In cases one specific cheques are required for the purpose of any investigation, enquiry, etc., under the law, they may be preserved beyond 10 years. Drawee banks shall make necessary arrangements to preserve the images of all government cheques for a period of 10 years with themselves or through the National Archival System put in place by National Payments Corporation of XYZ (NPCI).
e. The government cheques paid by a drawee bank across its counter by way of cash withdrawal or transfer also need to be truncated and preserved for 10 years. Adequate safeguards shall be built to ensure that these images are captured separately by the drawee banks and not mixed up with the images of the instruments received for payment in clearing. A common electronic file containing the images of all the paid cheques shall be created on a daily basis for onward transmission to State Government Departments/ Treasuries/ Sub-
Treasuries
f. The branch handling the State Government transactions shall continue to send the Payment Scrolls on a daily basis in the prescribed form or as per the arrangement amongst the Sub- Treasury / Treasury to whom they are attached as hitherto. However, as the paid cheques would no longer be available with the accredited branch, the same will not be attached with the payment scroll, but the electronic images of paid cheques (by way of cash, clearing and transfer), preserved by the presenting bank, shall be provided to the Office of AG/State Government Departments/Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries by way of secured electronic communication/ e-mail, etc., as per their requirement.
g. At any time during the preservation period of cheques, for the purpose of reconciliation, enquiry, investigation, etc., the Office of AG/State Government Departments/Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries may require any paid cheque in physical form for which the concerned State Government Department/Treasury/Sub-Treasury would approach the dealing branch. Whenever so demanded, the dealing branch shala arrange to furnish the cheques paid by it by way of cash and transfer immediately. In case of cheques paid by way of clearing, the same shall be supplied to the Office of AG/State Government Departments/Treasuries/Sub-Treasuries within a reasonable period after obtaining it from the presenting bank. It is the responsibility of the presenting bank in such instances to comply with the request of the Office of AG/State Government Departments/Treasuries/Sub- Treasuries / Drawee bank for any physical cheque and provide the same to the respective Drawee bank within a reasonable period.
h. At present, the CTS are operated on grid basis. Hence, the government cheques drawn on RBI / agency banks shall be presented in the grid within whose jurisdiction the accredited/authorized branch of paying bank is located.
i. As hitherto, the Drawee bank shall ensure through the dealing branch that the mistakes/ discrepancies pointed out in payment scrolls, monthly DMS etc., are rectified as per procedure, missing images of paid cheques are submitted immediately, the copies of the scrolls duly verified by the Sub- Treasury/Treasury are kept on its record, etc.
j. The revised guidelines are effective in respect of cheques issued by the State Governments from July 01, 2019 and made applicable for those State Governments which give their consent for withdrawal of P2F arrangement. As and when State Governments give their consent, the same will be advised to the banks. In case any State Government desires to have a parallel run, the same may be done for a period not exceeding three months. During the parallel run period, P2F shall continue to remain operational and the Drawee banks should forward both the physical instruments and their images to concerned Treasury/Sub- treasury as desired by them. After completion of the parallel run, P2F shall be discontinued and only images shall be sent as outlined above.
4. Time Frame for Collection of Local /Outstation/Foreign Cheques / Instruments:
4.1 For Local Cheques presented in clearing credit will be afforded as on the date of settlement of funds in clearing and the account holder will be allowed to withdraw funds on T+1 or T+2 day as per return clearing norms in vogue at that centre. For cheques and other instruments sent for collection to centres within the country the following time norms shall be applied -
(a) Cheques / Instruments drawn on one of our branch deposited at another center- Same Day
(b) Cheques / Instruments drawn on other bank and sent for collection to:
i. Centers where our Bank have a branch: Maximum T + 6 days
ii. Centers where our Bank do not have a branch:
Centers
Maximum Time Frame ( in Days)
State Capitals
7
Major Cities
10
Other Locations
14
(c) Cheques drawn on foreign countries: Such instruments are accepted for collection on the 'best of efforts' basis. The bank is committed to ensuring that instruments drawn in foreign currencies and payable outside XYZ are collected in the quickest and most efficient manner. Towards this the Bank may enter into specific collection arrangements with its correspondent banks in those countries for speedy collection of such instrument(s). Bank would give credit to the party upon realization credit of proceeds into the bank's NOSTRO Account with the correspondent bank after taking into account cooling periods as applicable to the countries concerned.
5. Immediate Credit of Outstation Cheques / Instruments:
Branches / extension counters of the bank will consider providing immediate credit for outstation cheques / instruments up to the aggregate value of Rs.15000/-tendered for collection by individual account holder subject to satisfactory conduct of such account for a period not less than 6 months. Immediate credit will be provided against such collection instruments to the customer account. The credit given under this facility should not exceed Rs.15000/- per customer at any given point of time. The facility of immediate credit would also be made available in respect of local cheques at centres where no formal clearing house exists.

The facility of immediate credit will be offered in Savings Bank / Current / Cash Credit / Overdraft Accounts of the customers. For extending this facility there will not be any separate stipulation of minimum balance in the account. Bank shall not decline to accept outstation cheques deposited by its customers for collection.
Under this policy, prepaid instruments like Demand Drafts, Interest / Dividend Warrants of other Banks shall be treated at par with cheques. In the event of dishonour of cheque against which immediate credit was provided, interest shall be recoverable from the customer for the period the bank remained out of funds at the rate applicable for clean overdraft limits sanctioned for individual customers.
For the purpose of this Policy, a satisfactorily conducted account shall be the one, who comply following guidelines -
a) Opened at least six months earlier and complying with KYC norms;
b) Conduct of which has been satisfactory and bank has not noticed any irregular dealings;
c) Where no cheques / instruments, for which immediate credit was afforded, returned unpaid for financial reasons;
d) Where the bank has not experienced any difficulty in recovery of any amount advanced in the past including cheques returned after giving immediate credit.
Bank shall levy normal collection charges and out of pocket expenses while providing immediate credit against outstation instruments tendered for collection. Exchange charges applicable for cheques purchase will not, however be charged.
The facility of immediate credit would not be applicable to cheques collected under Speed Clearing arrangements.
6. Purchase of local/outstation cheques:
Bank may, at its sole discretion, purchase local / outstation cheque tendered for collection at the specific request of the customer or as per prior arrangement. Besides satisfactory conduct of account, the standing of the drawer of the cheque will also be a factor considered while purchasing the cheque.

7. Payment of Interest for delayed Collection of local /Outstation Cheques and Cheques Payable:
7.1 As part of the compensation policy of the bank, the bank will pay interest to its customer on the amount of collection instruments in case there is delay in giving credit beyond the time period mentioned above. Such interest shall be paid without any demand from customers in all types of accounts. There shall be no distinction between instruments drawn on the bank's own branches or on other banks for the purpose of payment of interest on delayed collection.

7.2 Interest for delayed collection shall be paid at the following rates:
(a) Saving Bank Rate for the period of delay beyond 3 working days in case of local cheques.
(b) Savings Bank rate for the period of delay beyond 7 days in collection of outstation cheques payable at CTS Centres and 10 days in non CTS Centres.
(c) Where the delay is beyond 14 days interest will be paid at the rate applicable to term deposit for the respective period.
(d) In case of extraordinary delay, i.e. delays exceeding 90 days interest will be paid at the rate of 2% above the corresponding Term Deposit rate.
(e) In the event the proceeds of cheque under collection was to be credited to an overdraft / loan account of the customer and credit is delayed beyond the time period of three days for local cheque, seven days for outstation cheque payable at CTS centres and ten days for non CTS centres, interest will be paid at the rate applicable to the loan account. For extraordinary delays i.e. delay exceeding 90 days, interest will be paid at the rate of 2% above the rate applicable to the loan account.
(f) The interest will be paid only when such amount is Rs. 10/- or more.
8. Cheques / Instruments lost in transit / in clearing process or at paying bank's branch:
8.1 In the event a cheque or an instrument accepted for collection is lost in transit in the clearing process or at the paying bank's branch, the bank shall immediately on coming to know of such loss, bring the same to the notice of the account holder so that the account holder can inform the drawer to record stop payment and also take care that cheques, if any, issued by him / her are not dishonoured due to non-credit of the amount of the lost cheques / instruments. The bank would provide all assistance to the customer to obtain a duplicate instrument from the drawer of the cheque.
8.2 In line with the compensation policy of the bank, the bank will compensate the account holder in respect of instruments lost in transit in the following manner -
a) 	In case intimation regarding loss of instrument is conveyed to the customer beyond the time limit stipulated for collection (3/7/10 days as the case may be) interest will be paid for the period exceeding the stipulated collection period at the rates specified above in para 6.2 of the policy.
b) In addition, bank will pay interest on the amount of the cheque for a further period of 15 days at Savings Bank rate to provide for likely further delay in obtaining duplicate cheque/instrument and collection thereof.
c) The bank would also compensate the customer for any reasonable charges he/she incurs in getting duplicate cheque/instrument upon production of receipt, in the event the instrument is to be obtained from a bank/ institution who would charge a fee for issue of duplicate instrument.


9. Charging of Interest on cheques returned unpaid where instant Credit was given:
9.1 If a cheque sent for collection for which immediate credit was provided by the bank is returned unpaid, the value of the cheque will be immediately debited to the account. Interest where applicable would be charged on the notional overdrawn balances in the account, had credit not been given initially.
9.2 If the proceeds of the cheque were credited to the Savings Bank Account and was not withdrawn, the amount so credited will not qualify for payment of interest when the cheque is returned unpaid. If proceeds were credited to an overdraft / cash credit / loan account, interest shall be recovered at the rate of 2% above the interest rate applicable to the clean overdraft / loan from the date of credit to the date of reversal of the entry to the extent the bank was out of funds.
10. Positive Pay System (PPS)

10.1 Following the Reserve Bank of XYZ Notification no. RBI: 2020-21:41 DPSS.CO. RPPD.No.309:04.07.005:2020-21 dated September 25, 2020 to eliminate / combat cheque related frauds by reconfirming key details of large value cheques, Centralised Positive Pay System (CPPS) for cheques of Rs.50,000/- and above for CTS has been implemented, effective from 01st January, 2021.
10.2 Further, to augment customer safety in cheque payments and reduce instances of fraud occurring on account of tampering of cheque leaves, Bank has decided to make Positive Pay System (PPS) as mandatory for cheques of Rs.5,00,000/- and above for CTS w.e.f 01st January, 2022. i.e. if issuer of the cheque does not provide cheque details under PPS for cheque of Rs.5,00,000/- and above for CTS , then his/her cheque shall be returned under reason code "70" with reason "Advice not Received".
Circular letter and Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) regarding details procedure / user guidelines on Positive Pay System (PPS) for Cheque Truncation System (CTS) has been circulated vide BC.2021-22/143 dated December 20, 2021.
11. Miscellaneous:
(a) Cheques which are deposited with wrong account number mentioned on the Pay-in slip, Bank will return such cheques to the customers on the address mentioned within 48 working hours However in cases with incomplete address, incomplete phone no., no phone number mentioned on the Pay-in slip, the bank will be responsible to keep these instruments for a maximum period of 3 months.
(b) Cheques received back unpaid will be returned by post/ courier etc. to the customer within 48 working hours on the address recorded in Bank's database. However, these will be kept in the Bank for returning to the customer over the counter if he/she makes a request for the same. If not collected by the customer within 15 days bank will send them back at the recorded address by post or courier.
(c) The list of objections for return of Instruments and Image based Cheque Clearing, as detailed in Annexure D of Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing House of RBI, has been placed as Annexure-4 of this document.
(d) Cheque return charges shall be levied only in cases where the customer is at fault and is responsible for such returns. The list of reasons for return, where the customers are not at fault are indicated in the Annexure-5.
(e) Cheques that need to be represented without any recourse to the payee, shall be made in the immediate next presentation clearing not later than 24 hours (excluding holidays) with due notification to the customers of such presentation through SMS alert, email etc.
(f) Dishonour /Return of cheques: Bank needs to mention the 'Date of Return' & sign/initial the Cheque return Memo and the objection slip is to be signed/ initialled giving therein a definite and valid reason for refusing payment as prescribed in Rule 6 of the Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing Houses (URRBCH). This will enable the holder of the instrument to have legal recourse against the drawer of the cheque.
(g) Collection of Third Party Cheques in clearing: RBI has prohibited Banks from crediting 'account payee' cheques to the account of any person other than the payee named therein. However, with a view to mitigate the difficulties faced by the members of co- operative credit societies in collection of account payee cheques, RBI permitted banks to collect for such societies account payee cheques drawn for an amount not exceeding Rs. 50,000/- on behalf of their constituents.
(h) As per RBI direction, no changes/corrections should be carried out on the cheques. For any changes in the payee's name, courtesy amount (amount in figures) or legal amount (amount in words) etc. excepting change in the date for validation period, fresh cheque forms should be used by customers. This will help the bank to identify and control fraudulent alterations. This prohibition is applicable to cheques cleared under the image based Cheques Truncation System(CTS) only and not applicable to cheques cleared through physical exchange of instruments.
12. Validity of Cheques / Drafts / Pay orders / Banker's Cheques :

With effect from April 1, 2012, the validity of Cheques / Drafts / Banker's Cheques is three months only from the date of issue. The validity period is mentioned on the face of Cheque leaves, Drafts / Banker's Cheques printed after 01.04.2012 Instruments should be presented within the validity period of three months from the date of issue.

13. Service Charge:
For all collection services the bank will recover appropriate service charges as decided by the bank from time to time and communicated to customer as indicated in the code of Bank's Commitment to Customers adopted by the bank and by displaying on Bank's website.

DISHONOUR OF CHEQUES & DEBIT MANDATES
14. Introduction: Reserve Bank of XYZ vide Circular No. DBOD.BC.Leg. No. 113/ 09.12.001/ 2002-03 dated June 26, 2003 has circulated detailed guidelines on dishonour of cheques and procedure thereof to deal with incidents of frequent dishonour of cheques of value of Rs. One Crore and above.
RBI vide Circular No. RBI/2009-10/2013 DBOD.No.Leg.BC.59/09.07.005/2009-10 dated November 09, 2009 advised banks to have Bank's own approach and a Board Approved Policy for dealing with frequent dishonour of cheques of value of less than Rs. One Crore and matters related to frequent dishonour of ECS mandates.
RBI vide their Circular No. RBI/ 2016-17/33 DBOD.No.Leg.BC.3/09.07.005/ 2016-17 dated August 04, 2016 has reviewed and modified the guidelines on dishonour of cheque and procedure thereof to deal with the cheques of value of Rs. One Crore and Above and granted discretion to the banks to determine response on dishonour of cheque through a Bank's Policy approved by the Board or its Committee taking into consideration the need to prevent misuse of the cheque drawing facility and avoid penalising customers for unintended dishonour of cheques.
15. Objective: The objective of this policy is to frame the guidelines, procedures and monitoring system on dishonour of cheques and ECS debit mandates to ensure financial discipline among the customers and also avoid hardship to customers for unintended dishonour of cheques and ECS mandate
16. Guidelines on Dishonour of Cheques
16.1 As per recommendation of the Goiporia Committee on return / dispatch of the dishonoured cheque to the customer, all branches should dispatch dishonoured cheques immediately to the payees / holders promptly, without any delay, in any case within 24 hours.
16.2 The paying branch should return dishonoured cheques presented through clearing houses strictly as per the return discipline prescribed for respective clearing houses in terms of Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing Houses. The collecting Bank branch on receipt of such dishonoured cheques should dispatch such dishonoured cheques immediately to the payees / holders, in any case within a maximum period of 24 hours. If there is holiday on the next day, than on the first day when bank branch reopens after holiday.
16.3 Cheques presented directly at the paying branches for settlement of transaction by way of transfer between two accounts with the same bank, such dishonoured cheques should be returned to payees/ holders immediately, in any case within 24 hours.
16.4 Under grid Based CTS clearing system, collecting branches should dispatch/ return the dishonoured cheque to the payee/ account holder, immediately.
16.5 In case of dishonour / return of cheque, the paying branches should clearly indicate the return reason code on the return memo bearing the signatures / initials of the bank officials as prescribed in Rule 6 of the Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing Houses (URRBCH). Branches should extend full co-operation to customers for furnishing documentary proof of the fact of dishonour of cheque in any proceedings relating to dishonoured cheque before a court, consumer forum and/ or at any other forum/ or any other Competent Authority.
16.6 Branches should ensure to maintain complete and proper record of the dishounoured cheques as per the format in Annexure-1 and preserve the relevant record, as per the Document Handling and Retention Policy for production of the same on demand by Court, Consumer Forum or any Competent Authority including the proof of dispatch, where ever possible.
17. Dealing with Incidents of Frequent Dishonour of Cheques and ECS Debit Mandate
With a view to enforce financial discipline among the customer, prevent misuse of cheque drawing facility and avoid penalising customers for unintended dishonour, Branches should follow the following procedure -
17.1 Frequent Dishonour of Cheques/ Debit Mandates of less than Rs. One Crore:
(i) As per RBI's Master Circular on Customer Service dated 01.07.2015, In case of dealing with frequent dishonour of cheque of value of less than Rs. 1 crore, RBI has not suggested any specific action instead it is advised that banks should have a Board approved policy for dealing with frequent dishonour of cheques of value of less than Rs. 1 crore. Accordingly, for the purpose of this policy, following action shall be undertaken.
(ii) In the event of dishonour of cheque/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH debit mandate in a particular account of drawer due to insufficient funds on FOUR occasions in a financial year, cautionary notice should be issued to the account holder to maintain adequate balance/ limit in the account at the time of issuance of the cheques/ schedule date of debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH and also to intimate the customer that Bank will not issue further cheque book/s and may consider closure of the account on further dishonour of cheque/ debit mandate due to financial reason.
(iii) If the cheque/ debit mandate viz. ECS/NECS/NACH is returned/ dishonoured for the FIFTH time in a particular account during a financial year due to insufficient funds, no further cheque book will be issued.
(iv) Branches may consider closure of the account after completion of one month of the issuance of second cautionary advice/ notice to customer on dishonour of cheque on FIVE occasions in a financial year due to financial reasons and Branch is not satisfied with the justification of the customer in this regard, if any.
(v) Advance accounts viz. Cash Credit, Overdraft Accounts, etc., wherein cheques/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH have been returned for financial reasons i.e. "Exceeds Arrangement", the need for continuance or otherwise of these credit facilities and the cheque book facility relating to these accounts should be reviewed by the appropriate authority higher than the sanctioning authority.
(vi) Notice should be displayed for the information of customers on the notice board within Branch premises and Bank's website that no fresh cheque book will be issued to the customers and account may be considered for closure in the event of dishonour of Cheques/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH of value less than Rs.One Crore on FIVE occasions in a particular account due to insufficient funds in a financial year.



(vii) In the event where cheque is dishonoured on three occasions due to other than financial reason and where customer is at fault, Branch should contact and inform the customer to rectify the irregularity and not to repeat the same in future.
In the event of discrepancies in the particulars due to which debit mandates are returned, branch should invariably contact and intimate the customers to update the particulars of the account with the respective organization/ service providers
17.2 Frequent dishonour of Cheques/ Debit Mandates of value of Rs. One Crore and above:
(i) Dishonour of cheque/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH during the financial year in a particular account on THREE occasions due to insufficient funds/ exceeds arrangement, cautionary notice should be issued to the account holder to maintain adequate balance/ ensure limit availability in the account at the time of issuance of the cheque/ on schedule date of debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH and also intimate the customer that Bank will be constrained to withdraw the cheque book facility and may consider closure of the account on further dishonour/ return of cheque/ debit mandate due to financial reason.
(ii) No fresh cheque book shall be issued to the customer, if the instances of dishonour of cheque/ debit mandate viz. ECS/NECS/NACH happens on FOUR occasion in a financial year in the account due to financial reason.
(iii) The Branches may consider closure of the account after issuance of second cautionary notice/ advice on completion of one month from the issuance of such notice to customer, if cheque is dishonoured on FOURTH occasion in a financial year due to insufficient funds and the Branch is not satisfied with the justification submitted by the customer in this regard, if any.
(iv) Advance accounts viz. Cash Credit, Overdraft Accounts, etc., wherein cheques/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH have been returned for financial reasons i.e. "Exceeds Arrangement", the need for continuance or otherwise of these credit facilities and the cheque book facility relating to these accounts should be reviewed by the appropriate authority higher than the sanctioning authority.
(v) Bank shall display notice for the information of the customers within Branch premises and on Bank's website intimating of the withdrawal of cheque book facility/ closure of accounts in the event of dishonour of cheques/ debit mandate viz. ECS/ NECS/ NACH as stated above (exhibit 4.2.i & ii).
(vi) In the event of customer fault, on dishonoured of cheques/ debit mandates due to other than financial reason, Branches should contact and intimate the customer to rectify such irregularity so as not to be repeated in future.
18. RECOVERY OF SERVICE CHARGES ON DISHONOUR OF CHEQUE/NACH/ECS
Recovery of such charges will be ensured as per extant instructions on Service Charges enforce. Returning of Cheque over the counter will also be recorded in the system as rejected transaction and applicable service charges will be levied.



(vii)







19. MONITORING AND REPORTING:
19.1 General Operations Department, Head Office will monitor and report to the Audit Committee of the Board every quarter on the position of followings-
i. Dishonour of cheques of Rs. One Crore and above.
ii. Dishonour of cheques favouring Stock Exchange relating to Broker Entities, irrespective of the amount.
19.2 Zonal Office must obtain the Branch wise data from Head Office, Datawarehouse on dishonour of cheque/debit mandate viz. ECS/NECS/NACH due to 'Insufficient Funds' on a regular/ monthly and cumulative basis during the current financial year and ensure following up with the erring customers through the concerned branches.
19.3 A consolidated statement of the Zone be submitted to Head Office, General Operations Department through the NBG office for the information and monitoring at Head Office.

20. Force Majeure:
The bank shall not be liable to compensate customers for delayed credit if some unforeseen event (including but not limited to civil commotion, sabotage, lockout, strike or other labour disturbances, accident, fires, natural disasters or other "Acts of God", war, pandemic , invocation of Disaster Management Act by Central / State/ District / Local government / authorities, damage to the bank's facilities or of its correspondent bank(s), absence of the usual means of communication or all types of transportation, etc.) beyond the control of the bank prevents it from performing its obligations within the specified service delivery parameters.
21. Sunset Clause:
The above Bank's Model policy on Collection of Cheques / Instruments will be in force until the next review. The policy will be reviewed annually or at an earlier date, as may be required by the Bank.
"Post the approval of the Policy, any changes made by the RBI on the rules and regulations in respect of Bank's Model policy on Collection of Cheques / Instruments shall form an integral part of the Policy, pending their formal inclusion at the time of the next renewal of the Policy."

Annexure-1
Format of Cheque Return Register

Sl No
Date of Return
Chq. No.
Date of Chq.
Amt
A/c Type & No.
Name of Drawe r of
Chq
Nam e of Paye e
Prese nting Bank
Reason of return
Date on which the chq was returned to
the payee
Date of actual delivery of chq to bank/payee
Remar ks
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13





















                                                             Annexure-2 Format of Letter to be sent to customers on frequent dishonour of Cheque
Registered Letter
Ref. No.:	Date:

To,
Mr. / Ms. ...............................
............................................
............................................
 ............................................ Dear Sir/ Madam,
Re: Un-satisfactory conduct of your Saving/ Current/ Cash Credit/ Overdraft Account No....................................................................................... maintained with	Branch.

      There are instances of frequent dishonour of cheques in your account mentioned above due to financial reason.
2. You are aware that customer can issue a cheque to the payee only on availability of sufficient funds in the accounts. Please maintain financial discipline and also sufficient balance in the account to honour the issued cheque(s).
3. Please acknowledge receipt of this communication and confirm in writing within 15 days of receipt of this letter to maintain financial discipline and ensure satisfactory conduct of account.
4. In case of any further dishonour of cheque due to financial reason will be constrained to us as under -
(i) Not to issue fresh cheque book in future and may seek surrender of existing unused cheque books without any further delay/ reference and/ or;

(ii) To close the said account without any further delay/ reference and issue the Demand Draft/ Pay Order after deducting the applicable charges/ expenses etc., from the balance amount in your account;

(iii) To recall the Credit facility outstanding amount for closure the account (strike out if not applicable).
5. We further request you to use electronic channels for transfer of funds through RTGS, NEFT, IMPS, and Net Banking etc. to avoid such incidents.
6. In case of any clarification/ guidance/ advice you may contact in person with the branch officials.

Yours Faithfully,

Branch Manager
...	Branch




Annexure-3
Final Notice

Format of Letter of final notice to be sent to customers on frequent dishonour of Cheque

Registered Letter

Ref. No.:	Date:

To,
Mr. / Ms. ...............................
............................................
............................................
............................................


Dear Sir/ Madam,

Re: Un-satisfactory conduct of your Saving/ Current Account No....................................................................... maintained with	Branch.

Our earlier Letter Ref. No..................Dated..........................


Please refer to our Letter Ref. No. .............................Dated	advising
you to maintain sufficient balance in your account while issuing cheque(s) in the above mentioned account.

2. Despite our caution notice, you have failed to maintain financial discipline in your account, accordingly, please note that, bank is constrained to consider closure of your account within 30 days of receipt of this letter without further reference.

3. Balance Outstanding of your account shall be refunded you through Demand Draft/ Pay- order after deducting the applicable charges/ expenses. The closure proceeds will be sent to on your registered address.

4. You may submit your justification in writing in this regard, within 15 days of receipt of this letter.



Thanks You,


Yours Faithfully,


Branch Manager
...	Branch








Annexure- 4

MODEL LIST OF OBJECTIONS
(Both for Instrument and Image-based Cheque Clearing)

To	Bank,

The enclosed cheque / refund order / pay order /	is / are returned for the following reason(s)

Code No.
Reason for Return
(01-03)
Funds
01
Funds insufficient
02
Exceeds arrangement
03
Effects not cleared; present again
(04-09)
Refer to Drawer
04
Refer to drawer
05
Kindly contact drawer / drawee bank and please present again
(10-19)
Signature
10
Drawer's signature incomplete
11
Drawer's signature illegible
12
Drawer's signature differs
13
Drawer's signature required
14
Drawer's signature not as per mandate
15
Drawer's signature to operate account not received
16
Drawer's authority to operate account not received
17
Alterations require drawer's authentication
(20-29)
Stop Payment
20
Payment stopped by drawer
21
Payment stopped by attachment order
22
Payment stopped by court order
23
Withdrawal stopped owing to death of account holder
24
Withdrawal stopped owing to lunacy of account holder
25
Withdrawal stopped owing to insolvency of account holder
(30-49)
Instrument
30
Instrument post dated
31
Instrument out-dated / stale
32
Instrument undated / without proper date
33
Instrument mutilated; requires bank's guarantee
34
Cheque irregularly drawn / amount in words and figures differ
35
Clearing House stamp / date required
36
Wrongly delivered / not drawn on us
37
Present in proper zone
38
Instrument contains extraneous matter
39
Image not clear; present again with paper
40
Present with document
41
Item listed twice
42
Paper not received
50-59
Account
50
Account closed



51
Account transferred to another branch
52
No such account
53
Title of account required
54
Title of account wrong / incomplete
55
Account blocked (situation covered in 21-25)
60-69
Crossing / Endorsement
60
Crossed to two banks
61
Crossing stamp not cancelled
62
Clearing stamp not cancelled
63
Instrument specially crossed to another bank
64
Amount in protective crossing incorrect
65
Amount in protective crossing required / illegible
66
Payee's endorsement required
67
Payee's endorsement irregular / requires collecting bank's confirmation
68
Endorsement by mark / thumb impression requires attestation by
Magistrate with seal
(70-79)
RBI / Government
70
Advice not received
71
Amount / Name differs on advice
72
Drawee bank's fund with sponsor bank insufficient
73
Payee's separate discharge to bank required
74
Not payable till 1st proximo
75
Pay order / cheque requires counter signature
76
Required information not legible / correct
(80-99)
Miscellaneous
80
Bank's certificate ambiguous / incomplete / required
81
Draft lost by issuing office; confirmation required from issuing office
82
Bank / Branch blocked
83
Digital Certificate validation failure
84
Other reasons-connectivity failure
85
  Alterations on instrument-Other than '; Date'; filed (Alteration/correction on instruments are prohibited under Cheque Truncation System. Return reason code applicable to instruments presented in CTS)
86
Fake / Forged / Stolen- draft / cheque / cash order / interest warrant /
dividend warrant
87
'Payee's a/c Credited' - Stamp required
88
Other reasons (Please specify)
92
Bank excluded
Cheque No.(s)..... Amount Rs.. . . . . . . . .
Date of return: ...................

Signature & Stamp of returning bank .......










                                                                 Annexure - 5 Illustrative but not exhaustive list of objections where customers are not at fault
(Applicable for Instrument and Image-based Cheque Clearing as detailed in Annexure D to Uniform Regulations and Rules for Bankers' Clearing Houses)

Code No.
Reason for Return
33
Instrument mutilated; requires bank's guarantee
35
Clearing House stamp / date required
36
Wrongly delivered / not drawn on us
37
Present in proper zone
38
Instrument contains extraneous matter
39
Image not clear; present again with paper
40
Present with document
41
Item listed twice
42
Paper not received
60
Crossed to two banks
61
Crossing stamp not cancelled
62
Clearing stamp not cancelled
63
Instrument specially crossed to another bank
67
Payee's endorsement irregular / requires collecting bank's confirmation
68
Endorsement by mark / thumb impression requires attestation by Magistrate
with seal
70
Advice not received
71
Amount / Name differs on advice
72
Drawee bank's fund with sponsor bank insufficient(applicable to sub- members)
73
Payee's separate discharge to bank required
74
Not payable till 1st proximo
75
Pay order requires counter signature
76
Required information not legible / correct
80
Bank's certificate ambiguous / incomplete / required
81
Draft lost by issuing office; confirmation required from issuing office
82
Bank / Branch blocked
83
Digital Certificate validation failure
84
Other reasons-connectivity failure
87
'Payee's a/c Credited' - Stamp required
92
Bank excluded


Code of Conduct & Ethics and Conflict of Interest Recognition & Management Policy

1. Preamble

1.1 Bank of XYZ is committed to conduct its business in accordance with the highest ethical standards, in order to merit and maintain the complete confidence and trust of all our stakeholders - customers, investors, staff members, communities, public and others we deal with.
1.2 The employees of the Bank are expected to conduct their personal affairs and manage their business transactions in a manner that does not result in adverse comments or criticism from its stakeholders, or in any way damage the Bank's reputation as a responsible financial services organization. The laid down quality policy of Bank of XYZ envisages its commitment to becoming the 'Bank of Choice' by providing superior, pro-active, innovative and state-of- the-art Banking services with an attitude of care and concern for the customers and its patrons.
1.3 This policy titled as 'Bank of XYZ Code of Conduct & Ethics and Conflict of Interest Recognition & Management Policy' (henceforth to be referred to as the Code) addresses both business and social relationships, which may present legal and ethical concerns, and also sets forth a Code of Conduct to guide all the staff members. It articulates the boundaries of behavior as well as expectations for behaviour. When each employee clearly knows the ethical standards of the Bank, they are more likely to recognize wrongdoing. Miscreants are often hesitant to commit an unethical act if they believe that everyone else around them knows it is wrong. Good ethics code focus employees on actions that result in doing the right things for the right reasons.

2. Philosophy of the Code
2.1 The philosophy behind introducing this Code is to make ethical behavior a habit whereby employees continuously test their actions against expected standards. Repeated over time this kind of habit becomes inculcated in the individual and ingrained in the culture of an organization.

2.2 The Code attempts to set forth and reinforce right conduct and behaviour to be followed steadfastly and in the process dissuade a culture of misconduct normally associated with wilful disregard of laws, regulations and governance policies/processes/procedures. It reflects Bank's commitment to integrity and the highest standards of ethical practices.

2.3 The Code is intended to serve as the charter for day -to-day work to enable employees to make the right decisions while performing their roles and responsibilities across various functions in the Bank and, therefore, serve to underline the fundamental commitment to compliance with regulatory guidelines and laws of the land and the basic parameters of ethical behaviour.

2.4 This Code attempts to set forth the guiding principles on which the Bank shall operate and conduct its daily business with its multitudinous stakeholders, government and regulatory agencies, media and anyone else with whom it is connected. It recognizes that the Bank is a trustee and custodian of public money and in order to fulfill its fiduciary obligations and responsibilities, it has to maintain and continue to enjoy the trust and confidence of public at large.

3. General Nature, Applicability & Administration of the Code

3.1 The Code is applicable to all the Bank employees and Directors. Even probationers, consultants, agents, third party whose services Bank has solicited, will also undertake to comply with the Code as part of their business relationship with the Bank. The Code shall come into force with effect from the date of approval by the Board of Directors of Bank of XYZ.
3.2 If any part of this Code conflicts with applicable law, the law will prevail. If any part of this Code is deemed invalid, the validity and enforceability of its other parts & provisions shall not be affected. The Bank reserves the right to interpret the Code at its sole discretion. The guidelines, policies and rules mentioned in this Code and their content may be amended or modified from time to time, in the normal course of business, as deemed necessary and appropriate.
3.3 The rules of conduct set out in the Code are not exhaustive; they serve to complete the corporate guidelines, policies, permanent instructions, procedures and other standards governing our conduct and with which we must comply at all times.
3.4 The Code does not replace other provisions and obligations otherwise applicable under the law.
3.5 The rules set out in this Code are the same for everyone, and apply at all times and in any location when carrying out Bank's duties, be they of a professional or social nature.
4. Administration of the Code & Bank's Responsibility

4.1 It is the responsibility of each Director and Staff Member to be familiar with the Code. The supervising staff are expected to make every reasonable effort to ensure that their subordinate staffs continue to comply with the provisions of the Code.
4.2 Senior management shall implement the Code, and determine matters of interpretation. Monitoring of adherence to the Code shall be accomplished by audit, examination, and human resource procedures.
4.3 Staff members are encouraged to seek the advice of the appropriate supervisor regarding questions of interpretation, and of the applicability of the provisions of the Code to a particular situation.
4.4 Any violation or suspected violation of this Code may warrant appropriate corrective action including disciplinary action under Bank of XYZ Officer Employees' (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976 & Bipartite Settlement dated 11.11.2020 amended up to date.
4.5 It is the responsibility of the Bank to ensure that all employees are made aware of the Code. The Bank shall ensure availability of adequate resources and support to promote better understanding of the Code. Any changes to the Code will be circulated to all employees in a timely manner.
5. Observance of the Code
All Employees are required to affirm their having read and understood the Code and confirm to abide by it by signing a Declaration (Annexure I), to be submitted through HRMS, which shall be deemed to be binding on the signee.

6. Waivers of the Code
If under certain exceptional circumstances, it becomes appropriate to grant a waiver of a provision of the Code, it must be made in writing and receive the prior consent of the Board of Directors of the Bank. Any such waiver must be promptly disclosed via Bank's website or other expeditious and efficient method that is in accordance with legal and regulatory requirements.
7. Interpretation of the Code
In case of any questions or clarifications, the General Manager (HR) will be the competent authority to clarify / interpret the same.
8. Purpose of the Code 

8.1 To promote a consistent understanding of, and approach to, the standards of ethical behaviour, including the ethical approach to actual or apparent conflicts of interests between personal and professional relationships;
8.2 To raise awareness of acceptable and unacceptable behaviour, and through this endeavour to avoid any real or perceived misconduct;
8.3 To promote prompt internal reporting of violations and suspected violations;
8.4 To uphold the credibility of our organisation through inculcation of the most desirable conduct and the highest ethics into the culture of our organisation.
8.5 To build a strong and adequate internal process and governance and reinforce the right conduct and behaviour amongst the employees to avert a culture of misconduct which is normally associated with wilful disregard of laws, regulations and governance policies/processes/procedures.
8.6 To have an internally strong and uncompromising vigilance mechanism which would give the requisite comfort to external agencies that our Bank meets the requisite standards to safeguard public interest.
8.7 To reinforce an independent internal ombudsman mechanism within the Bank to resolve customer complaints.
8.8 To foster and maintain a sound ethical culture wherein employees feel comfortable speaking up and voicing their concerns, and they trust their colleagues will do the same.
8.9 To have a leadership which will set a tone that inspires trust in their own ethics and in their willingness to hear and respond to concerns.
8.10 To remove fear of retaliation which acts as a big deterrent for reporting misconduct, and thus, prevents ethical cultures from thriving.
8.11 To foster a broader approach which goes beyond the rules, whereby all kinds of misconduct risks can be proactively searched.
8.12 To clearly define acceptable and unacceptable behaviours linked in particular to financial misreporting and misconduct, economic/financial crime, including fraud, money laundering and anti-trust practices, bribery, corruption, market manipulation, mis-selling and other violations of consumer protection laws;
8.13 To clarify that in addition to compliance with legal, regulatory requirements and internal policies, everyone in the organisation is expected to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity and perform their duties with due skill, care and diligence;

8.14 To ensure that all are aware of the potential internal and external disciplinary actions, legal actions and sanctions that may follow unacceptable behaviours.
8.15 To articulate practices, internal controls and compliance mechanisms that are conducive to limiting the opportunities for misconduct.

9. CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
9.1 Conflict of interest implies a situation of conflict between the duty of a person and private interests of an individual, which could improperly influence the performance of his/ her duties and responsibilities. Conduct & ethics are liable to get challenged when there are instances of conflicts of interests.
9.2 Examples of situations which may arise due to conflicts of interest :
9.2.1 Where bank extends loans to a firm while its proprietary trading function buys and sells securities issued by that firm;
9.2.2 Where bank enters into a business relationship with an entity in which one of the Bank's Board members has a financial interest;
9.2.3 Where the bank is part of a group, reporting lines and information flows between the banks, its parent entity and/or other subsidiaries can lead to the emergence of conflicts of interest (e.g. sharing of potential proprietary, confidential or otherwise sensitive information from different entities or pressure to conduct business on a non- arm's length basis).
10. Purpose of Conflict of Interest Recognition and its Management Policy

10.1 To ensure that in all circumstances the interest of the Bank should be central in the decisions taken.
10.2 To confirm that reporting lines and the allocation of responsibilities within the bank is clear, well-defined, coherent, enforceable and duly documented.
10.3 To ensure that there is a clear, transparent and documented decision making process and a clear allocation of responsibilities and authority within the internal control framework, including business lines, internal units and non-revenue generating functions.
10.4 To safeguard an adequate, effective and independent internal control framework that includes a clear organisational structure and a well-functioning risk management, compliance and internal audit functions that have sufficient authority, stature and resources to perform their functions;
10.5 To identify the relationships, services, activities or transactions of the Bank in which conflicts of interest may arise and state how these conflicts should be managed.
10.6 To cover at least relationships between a Bank and its various categories of shareholders, the members of its Board; its staff; material suppliers or business partners; other related parties; and legal or natural persons closely linked to persons under points 10.1 to 10.5 above.

11. Responsibilities under the Code of Conduct & Ethics & Conflict of Interest Recognition and Management Policy

11.1 General adherence to applicable laws and regulations
11.1.1 We must be familiar and comply with all applicable laws, regulations, rules and regulatory orders governing our activities. Any inadvertent non-compliance, if detected, must be immediately reported to the competent authorities.
11.1.2 We must not, at any time, participate directly or indirectly in activities that are illegal or could be perceived as such, even outside our duties.
11.1.3 Any suspicious activity must be reported to the competent authority promptly.
11.1.4 When performing our duties, we must immediately disclose to the competent authority if we are the subject of an inquiry, proceedings, lawsuits or convictions, regardless of its type, and that could be connected to our function.

11.2 Effective & desirable communication

11.2.1 To promote employee communication and teamwork by maintaining genuine and human relationships based on integrity and trust. Official communication must be constructive, professional, courteous and open while ensuring the confidentiality of information.
11.2.2 To ensure that all communications sent via electronic networks are not defamatory, offensive, harassing or threatening and do not contain any illicit messages and duly follow rules of respect and civility.
11.2.3 To ensure not using electronic networks that allow for participating in illicit, obscene or offensive material and/ or violating copyright regulations. It is the discretion of the Bank to monitor activities on our equipment and electronic exchanges and Bank may question or be subject to an investigation to ensure that our activities correspond to the established and communicated security guidelines of the Bank.

11.3 Dealings with the customers
In all our dealings with the customers, we must be thoroughly professional in our approach. As bankers, we must function with trust, authenticity, transparency and integrity and, thus, give them complete, quality information and advise them properly, keeping in mind their needs and financial situation. We must inform them about the products and services that are best suited to their needs, regardless of Bank's sales targets/ objectives. We must also ensure that we use the information of our customers in a responsible and cautious manner.

11.4 Disclosures
To make full, fair, accurate, sensible, timely and meaningful disclosures in the periodic reports required to be filed by the Bank with government and regulatory agencies.

11.5 Healthy and safe work environment
11.5.1 To be committed to providing a healthy and safe work environment and complying with all applicable legislations. We are responsible for making decisions that will prevent risks and ensure our own health and safety as well as that of others in

accordance with the workplace health and safety guidelines. While carrying out our duties, whether on Bank premises or elsewhere, we must not take or be under the influence of any kind of drugs or alcohol. Employees are urged to continue compliance with the Non-Smoking policy in offices and also in other public places as required under the law.
11.5.2 We must uphold and maintain the dignity of our co-workers and make all efforts to maintain a productive work environment that is free from any kind of harassment including sexual harassment that may create an atmosphere of hostility and intimidation. Employees shall abide by the extant guidelines of the Bank in this regard.
11.5.3 To be committed to fostering an equal opportunity and inclusive workplace by embracing diversity and be free from all forms of discrimination, harassment and violence. All our actions and behavior must reflect respect for each other.

11.6 Conflict of Interest
11.6.1 Conflict of interest arises when there is an unfair advantage, be it real, potential or perceived. This means that we cannot reveal or use information acquired in the performance of our duties to obtain an advantage for ourselves or someone else. This obligation continues to apply after our employment has been terminated.
11.6.2 Hiring, managing or working with a family member could pose a potential conflict of interest.
11.6.3 To ensure to avoid situations where there is a perceived or actual conflict of interest, following behaviors must be avoided:

11.6.3.1 We must not falsify documents and skip any steps required by a policy or procedure to achieve or surpass a sales or profitability objective.
11.6.3.2 We must not purchase the Bank's 'repossessed' properties.
11.6.3.3 We must not accept appointment in any kind of employment / engagement without obtaining prior authorization from the competent authority.
11.6.3.4 We must not engage in any commercial activity with a customer or third party unless we have the prior authorization of the competent authority.
11.6.3.5 We have certain privileges as Bank employees. However, we cannot have someone else benefit directly or indirectly from the advantages and privileges awarded to us as Bank employees, other than those authorized by the banking advantages for employees and retirees.
11.6.3.6 We must carry out our personal transactions and those of our family members as if they or we were regular customers.
11.6.3.7 We must not grant loans to ourselves or members of our family or a company in which we or a member of our families have a stake.
11.6.3.8 	We must not accept any gift, service or perk which might influence our work or decisions. We must not solicit nor encourage giving of gifts or entertainment by an existing or potential customer, consultant or any third party, except if such solicitation is done on behalf of a charitable organization. In such cases, 100% of the net benefits must be remitted to the charitable organization on whose behalf the solicitation was made.



11.6.3.9 Our loyalty to the Bank governs our behavior and we must ensure that the assets and property safeguarded or under the control of the organization are preserved.
11.6.3.10 We must not work for our own business or for that of a third party during business hours. We must also minimize activities unrelated to our work such as checking social networks like Facebook or Instagram.
11.6.3.11 We must abstain from making comments that could tarnish the Bank's image or reputation with customers, employees or the general public. We must avoid mentioning the organization when we express personal opinions. This obligation continues to apply after our employment has ended. Both at work and in our personal activities, we must avoid participating, directly or indirectly, in activities that could compromise the organization's interests, image or reputation.
11.6.3.12 We must use the organization's name, trademark and any other form of its intellectual property exclusively for business purposes in accordance with the applicable standards in this regard. If, as part of our duties, or while using the organization's equipment, we develop processes, programs or any other intellectual property, the Bank will be the owner of such property from the onset.
11.6.3.13 We must extend fullest cooperation in investigations, requests for information and audits, regardless of whether they are internal or external.
11.6.3.14 Communications with the media must only be made by persons authorized to represent the Bank in dealings with the media in accordance with guidelines in force in the organization.
11.6.3.15 We must safeguard organization's assets against any type of inappropriate use. These assets include cash and marketable securities, offices, supplies and equipment, systems and technological resources. We must not use the equipment or resources of the organization, including the services of its employees, other than for the needs of our duties, except insofar as this use is reasonable and in accordance with the organization's corporate guidelines and policies. In such a case, we must obtain proper authorization in advance
11.6.3.16 Any expenses that we may incur for and on behalf of the Bank must be reasonable, relevant and in compliance to applicable policies of the Bank. The manner in which customers are entertained must comply with the fundamental principles of the Code and be mindful of maintaining our image and reputation.
11.6.3.17 The Bank must not be associated with any school of thought or political party line. However, we may, on a personal level, participate or contribute to political activities. We must not carry out political activities on work premises or use the time and resources of the organization for such activities. No donations to political parties or candidates may be made with or reimbursed from Bank funds.
11.6.3.18 Any close or romantic involvement with another employee of the Bank, supplier, third party might affect an employee's ability to exercise good judgment on behalf of the Bank, leading to conflict of interest. Such a situation must be reported to the competent authority to enable adoption of corrective measures.

12. Honest and ethical conduct
To adhere to the highest standards of honest and ethical conduct, including proper and ethical procedures in dealing with actual or apparent conflicts of interest between personal and professional relationships.
13. Confidentiality and non-disclosure of Information & Fair Dealing
13.1 We must maintain the highest level of confidentiality and fair dealing within and outside the Bank.
13.2 We must diligently and consistently respect the confidentiality of information acquired in the course of employment. Employees must take all reasonable measures to protect the confidentiality of non- public information about the Bank and its customers and other third parties obtained or created in the course of employment and to prevent the unauthorized disclosure or misuse of such information.
13.3 We must ensure that confidential information acquired in the course of employment is only used in the proper performance of their duties and not used for personal advantage or disseminated to the public and other third parties either during or after employment without Company approval.
13.4 No one must post any confidential or strategic information on social networks.
13.5 Employees may access Bank's systems and confidential information only if truly needed to perform official duties. Employees must act within the ambit of security and confidentiality guidelines of the Bank while carrying out their duties.
13.6 Any event which may pose threat to Bank's security and jeopardize the protection of confidentiality must be reported to the competent authority without any delay.
13.7 	We must safeguard the confidentiality of information about our customers and employees.
13.8 We must be vigilant about cyber security risks and information theft and report any that could jeopardize the confidentiality of information.
13.9 We must consistently adopt secure and responsible practices and be familiar and comply with all information security guidelines.
13.10 All employees must remain vigilant about phishing attempts, fraudulent calls or suspicious behavior and report without delay any suspicious behaviour by email, phone, text or in person.
13.11 	We must safeguard our portable equipments (laptop and smartphone) against loss or theft at anytime and anywhere. It is essential to report immediately any loss or theft of equipment.
13.12 	We must be cautious while transmitting confidential information only to individuals who need it as part of their official duties. Not to use information about customers and employees for personal gain or maliciously. Not to share our passwords or user codes and protect them adequately.
13.13 All employees must follow secure destruction procedures once information we possess are no longer required.
13.14 We must strictly follow the guidelines of not posting confidential or strategic information on social networks. To safely store any document containing confidential information under lock and key.

13.15 Since all information circulated on the organization's electronic networks belongs to the organization, we must ensure the following:

13.15.1 During work hours, the electronic networks are used to carry out our duties.

13.15.2 The confidential information transmitted via electronic networks complies with the security guidelines in effect. If emails are sent outside our networks, the contents of the emails must be secured.

13.15.3 Only our official email address is to be used to handle, send or receive confidential or professional information. No information belonging to the Bank, customers or employees should be stored on external sites (e.g., Dropbox, Amazon Drive, Google Drive) that are not authorized by the Bank.

13.16 We must deal fairly without any discrimination and with honour with Bank's customers, competitors, co-employees, suppliers and other business associates as well as public authorities.
13.17 No employee should take unfair advantage of anyone through manipulation, concealment, abuse of privileged information, misrepresentation of facts or any other unfair dealing practice such as bribe or other illegal gratification, which may cause disrepute or disgrace to the institution.

14. Acceptance or giving of Gifts / Benefits

14.1 No employee must accept money, inappropriate or excessive gifts, loans, excessive hospitality, or other special treatment or items of value (Cash payments, gifts, entertainment, excessive business promotional activities, covering or reimbursing expenses, investment opportunities, shares, securities, loans or contractual rights, promise of future employment, payments under consulting agreements, subcontracts, stock options, and similar items of value) from any supplier, customer or any interested party which could impair an employee's judgement or be perceived to be a conflict of interest, bribe or inappropriate gift. A gift or hospitality is inappropriate or excessive if, under the circumstances, it has a value or is of such a personal nature that it is out of proportion to Bank's business needs;

14.2 All employees must comply with anti-bribery policy of the Bank. A bribe is anything of value that may be seen as an attempt to influence an action or a decision in order to obtain or retain business or acquire an improper advantage. This could include money, gifts, favors, use of company resources, entertainment or other items of value.

14.3 An occasional gift which is infrequent and is of limited value and is unlikely to lead someone to feel obligated or influenced by them may be accepted, although employees are encouraged to share the gift baskets with other employees in their department.

14.4 Employees should be governed by the Bank of XYZ Officer Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 and related guidelines applicable to employees as they refrain from accepting or giving any favor, gift, entertainment or any other benefit subject to certain conditions.

15. Corruption and Anti-Money Laundering

15.1 As employees, we must have zero tolerance for corruption. We must act with the utmost caution in this regard, especially being the custodian of public money. We must never solicit, accept or offer any bribes or other benefits of a similar nature in the performance of our duties. Our behaviour must not lead others to believe that we would accept such advantages.
15.2 We must take all necessary measures to reduce the risk that the Bank's products and services are used for money laundering and terrorist financing purposes. In our day- to-day activities, we must apply the principles set out in the Anti- Money Laundering Policy and the standards and procedures that stem from it. We must also immediately identify and report any unusual transactions or attempted unusual transactions.
15.3 To be careful not to be involved in any kind of fraudulent or illicit transactions, directly or indirectly, such as theft, manipulation of accounting files, misappropriation of funds, appropriation of the Bank's funds, falsification of accounts, documents and files, and fraudulent use of the Bank's registers and resources. It is also our duty to report any suspicious activity immediately.

16. Product Appropriateness & Suitability

We must know and understand Bank's customers' needs and financial situation and accordingly inform them about Bank's products and services that are best suited to their needs, regardless of Bank's sales targets. Employees must ensure that product recommendation is well suited to the needs and means of the customer in view of the customer's objectives, degree of financial knowledge and sophistication, the level of acceptable risk and other factors made known to the Bank. They should not mis-sell products, conceal or willfully withhold details, product features and risks pertaining to products being offered by the Bank.
17. Assets and Resource Usage
All employees shall protect and ensure efficient use of Bank's assets including but not limited to the result of an employee's work, money and funds, Information about corporate or customer transactions, Intellectual Property, proprietary information, equipment, computer systems and software, furnishings etc.
18. Intellectual Property
All assets / propriety developed by the employee during the course of employment with the Bank shall belong exclusively to the Bank and ownership of copyrights of such assets and those of any derivative assets lies with the Bank. We must use Bank's name, trademark and any other form of its intellectual property exclusively for business purposes in accordance with the applicable rules in this regard.
19. Reporting Violations via Whistle Blower Policy
19.1 The Bank encourages an open door policy and suggests that employees share their questions, concerns, suggestions or complaints with someone who can address them properly. In most cases, an employee's superior is in the best position to address an area of concern.
19.2 Any violations or suspected violations or of events that could lead to any such violations perceived violation of the Code may be reported under Bank's Whistleblower Policy without fear or reprisal or being threatened by doing so. Anyone filing a complaint must be acting in good faith and have reasonable grounds for believing the information disclosed indicates a violation.
19.3 All concerns raised by the employee must be treated promptly, fairly and discreetly without being disadvantaged or victimised for raising good faith concerns.
19.4 Violations or suspected violations may be submitted on a confidential basis or may be submitted anonymously.
20. Employee Conduct
20.1 Employees should ensure accuracy of Bank's operations and financial records that they are aware of within the framework of their duties. These include not only financial accounts, but other records such as quality reports, time records, expense reports and submissions such as benefit claim forms. Employees must report their claims/ expenses such as conveyance, transportation, halting, reimbursement claims, Bank's car etc accurately and in a timely manner.
20.2 Employees should maintain good conduct, discipline, punctuality and show courtesy and attention to all persons - colleagues, customers, business associates & vendors, regulators, and any other external stakeholders, in their transactions or dealings with the Bank.
20.3 Employees should ensure that they are appropriately dressed and properly groomed at all times.
20.4 Employees shall adhere to the Bank's work timings and leave management guidelines at all times.
20.5 Employees should ensure that they use their staff accounts for bona fide transactions. 20.6Employees must desist from discriminating against, harass or bully any other
employees.
20.7 The behavior of employees must reflect sincerity and willingness to learn from their mistakes and ability to view failures as feedback that provides them with the information they need to learn, grow and succeed.
20.8 Each employee must accept responsibility for their actions.
21. Public Representation
Employees should refrain from any direct interaction with the media, press and financial community, unless otherwise authorized to do so.
22. Environmental considerations
Employees are expected to incorporate environmental, health and safety considerations into their daily activities.
23. Audit & Investigation
Employees must cooperate with any internal or external investigation or audit, or any regulatory examination. If at any time, the employee is involved in any legal/administrative/quasi-judicial proceeding(s), they should immediately inform the competent authority, with relevant supporting documents and a brief summary of the proceedings.

24. Handling of Market News/Information
24.1 Employees should not encourage or circulate rumours or unverified information obtained from client, industry, any trade or any other sources without verification.
24.2 Employee should bear in mind that any market related news received by them either in their official mail/personal mail/blog or in any other manner, should be forwarded only after the same has been seen and approved by the Competent Authority. If an employee fails to do so, he/she shall be deemed to have violated the various provisions contained in SEBI Act/Rules/Regulations etc. and shall be liable for action.

25. Any violation of this Code is liable to attract disciplinary action

 An employee who violates this Code will become liable for prompt corrective action including appropriate disciplinary action depending on the nature, severity, and frequency of the violation. Staff Officers of the Bank are governed by the Bank of XYZ Officer Employees' (Conduct) Regulations, 1976 and the Award Staff members by the disciplinary action procedure laid down in the Bipartite Settlement dated 11.11.2020 amended up to date.

26. Review of the Policy :

The Policy will be reviewed after three years except in the light of any statutory requirement. Notwithstanding, the Bank reserves the right to review, modify and amend the policy whenever deemed necessary.



Annexure 1- Declaration Form


DECLARATION 



    I, hereby, declare that I have read & understood the Code of Conduct & Ethics and Conflict of Interest Recognition & Management Policy and understand my obligations as an employee to, hereby, comply with the said Code, as applicable at all times.

I confirm, and undertake to abide by the same in letter and spirit.

    I am also aware that failure to abide by the above Code of Conduct & Ethics may lead to disciplinary action as per Bank's extant Regulations/Rules.



Employee Name: 	

Signature:	

P.F.No : 	

Date:	

BANK OF XYZ PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE POLICY
Classification: Internal


BANK OF XYZ PREVENTION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT AT WORKPLACE POLICY

1. PREAMBLE

1.1. Equality of every person under the law is guaranteed by Article 14 of the XYZn Constitution. A safe workplace is a woman's legal right and sexual harassment constitutes a gross violation of women's right to equality and dignity. Often, it is excused as harmless and trivial, Contrary to these perceptions, it causes serious harm and is also a strong manifestation of sex discrimination at the workplace. This leads to poor productivity and a negative impact on lives and livelihoods.

1.2. Though sexual harassment at the workplace has assumed serious proportions, women usually do not report the matter to the concerned authorities in most cases due to fear of reprisal from the harasser, losing one's livelihood, being stigmatized, or losing professional standing and personal reputation.

1.3. The Sexual Harassment of Women at Workplace (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013 (herein after called as the "Act) has come into force and same has been published in the Gazette of XYZ, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section-1, dated the 23rd April 2013 as Act No. 14 of 2013. The act was amended and published in the Gazette of XYZ, Extraordinary, Part-II, Section-1, dated the 9th May 2016. Accordingly, while the policy is made in alignment with the Act and covers all the key aspects of the Act, for any further clarification reference shall always be made to the Act and the provisions of the Act shall prevail.

1.4. The Act was enacted to ensure safe working spaces for women and to build work environments that respect women's right to equality of status and opportunity. Very often situations that start off innocently, end up in inappropriate and unprofessional behaviours. It is important to remember that workplace sexual harassment is sexual, unwelcome and the experience is subjective. It is the impact and not the intent that matters and it almost always occurs in a matrix of power.

1.5. Bank of XYZ, (hereafter referred to as the 'Bank') founded on 07th September, 1906 is a leading Public Sector Bank in XYZ, headquartered at ABC. The Bank is committed to strict compliance of Government of XYZ instructions as advised from time to time, for empowerment of its employees. It has been the endeavour of the Bank to eliminate any form of discrimination and ensure equality, freedom, justice and dignity to all its employees. The employment decisions are made without regard to sex or gender or any other basis prohibited by law. Banks strives to provide conducive and harmonious work environment to guarantee that all employees enjoy equality, dignity and respect at par with others. By doing so, the Bank is empowered and better equipped to develop and deliver services to its customers - both internal and external and thus achieve business excellence.

1.6. The Chief General Manager / General Manager- Human Resources, Head Office shall be the designated authority with overall responsibility for the effective operation and implementation of this Policy. He / she shall be authorised to lay down / implement operational guidelines issued by the Government of XYZ for betterment of employees as advised from time to time.


1.7. It shall be the responsibility of every employee of the Bank to implement this policy. All employees, besides exhibiting behaviour which is beyond reproach, have a particular obligation to ensure appropriate behaviour at all times, towards women; promote this Policy; handle all such complaints seriously and attend to them promptly; monitor the work environment and seek expert help for complex or serious matters. Any employee who violates this Policy, or in any manner commits any act of harassment which is in violation to this policy shall be construed as having committed an act of misconduct liable to be dealt with as per Bipartite Settlements and the Bank of XYZ Officer Employees' (Discipline & Appeal) Regulations, 1976.


2. SCOPE

2.1. The Act casts a responsibility on Bank to create an environment which is free from sexual harassment. Bank always strives to ensure that appropriate work conditions are provided in respect of work, leisure, health and hygiene and to further ensure that there is no hostile environment towards women at work places and no woman employee should have reasonable grounds to believe that she is disadvantaged in connection with her employment.

2.2. It shall also be the duty of the Bank to prevent or deter the commission of acts of sexual harassment at the work place. It shall be the duty of Branch Manager / Office- in-Charge to bring to the notice of all employees and others concerned the relevant circular, copy of the Act and information about constitution of Internal Committee etc., at the Branch / Office spreading awareness about the issue of "prevention of sexual harassment at workplace".

2.3. This policy shall apply to all employees of the Bank, including trainees, contractual employees, employees on Probation and Permanent Employees employed with the Bank in any of its Branches / Offices. The policy equally applies to relations between superiors and subordinates and vice versa, as well as between peers.

2.4. For the purpose of the Act unless the context otherwise requires "aggrieved woman" means in relation to a workplace, a woman, of any age whether employed or not, who alleges to have been subjected to any act of sexual harassment by the respondent.

2.5. It includes all women employed by the Bank for any work on regular, temporary, ad- hoc or daily wage basis, either directly or through an agent, including a contractor. They may be working for remuneration, on a voluntary basis or otherwise. Their terms of employment can be express or implied. Further, she could be a co-worker, a contract worker, probationer, trainee, apprentice, or called by any other such name.

2.6. A workplace is defined as any place of work including but not limited to Branches, Administrative Offices, or any other office where Bank has employed / deployed / deputed its staff. And in addition includes any place visited by the employee arising out of or during the course of employment including transportation provided for undertaking such a journey.

2.7. The term "respondent" means a person against whom the aggrieved woman has made a complaint.


3. THE MANDATE

3.1. Section 2 (n) of the Act defines Sexual Harassment as follows: "sexual harassment" includes any one or more of the following unwelcome acts or behaviour (whether directly or by implication) namely:-
3.1.1. physical contact and advances; or
3.1.2. a demand or request for sexual favours; or
3.1.3. making sexually coloured remarks; or remarks of a sexual nature about a person's clothing or body
3.1.4. showing pornography; or making or posting sexual pranks, sexual teasing, sexual jokes, sexually demeaning or offensive pictures, cartoons or other materials through email, SMS, MMS etc.;
3.1.5. Repeatedly asking to socialize or continued expressions of sexual interest against a person's wishes;
3.1.6. Giving gifts or leaving objects that are sexually suggestive;
3.1.7. Eve teasing, innuendos and taunts, physical confinement against one's will or any such act likely to intrude upon one's privacy;
3.1.8. Persistent watching, following, contacting of a person; and
3.1.9. Any other unwelcome physical, verbal or non-verbal conduct of sexual nature

3.2. Section 3 of the said Act provides that-No woman shall be subjected to sexual harassment at workplace. As per the Act the following circumstances, among other circumstances, if it occurs or is present in relation to or connected with any act or behaviour of sexual harassment may amount to sexual harassment:-
3.2.1. implied or explicit promise of preferential treatment in her employment; or
3.2.2. implied or explicit threat of detrimental treatment in her employment: or
3.2.3. implied or explicit threat about her present or future employment status; or
3.2.4. interference with her work or creating an intimidating or offensive or hostile work environment for her; or
3.2.5. humiliating treatment likely to affect her health or safety.


4. INTERNAL COMMITTEE (IC)

4.1. Section 4 of the Act stipulates that Every Employer of a workplace shall, by an order in writing constitute a Committee to be known as the "Internal Committee (IC)" as per the norms prescribed therein and the Internal Committee shall inquire into the complaint. To ensure compliance of the provisions of the Act, the following broad guidelines are reproduced here under.

4.2. HO / NBGs / Zones shall constitute the Internal Committee at their level in accordance with the provisions of the Act. General Manager (HR) will nominate the members of the HO IC; General Manager (NBG) will nominate the members of the NBG IC; Zonal Manager will nominate the members of the ZO IC in terms of the composition laid down below.

4.3. The full details of the constitution of the committee should be furnished to every Branch / Office coming under the respective NBG / Zone / Office for being displayed on the notice board of the Branch / Office for the information of all customers / public
/ employees.


4.4. The following guidelines should be followed while nominating members of Internal Committee:-
4.4.1. A Presiding Officer who shall be a woman employee at a senior level in HO / NBG
/ Zone / Office from amongst the employees;
4.4.1.1. In HO IC - in any case not below the rank of Deputy General Manager - Scale VI
4.4.1.2. In NBG IC - in any case not below the rank of Chief Manager - Scale IV
4.4.1.3. In ZO IC - in any case not below the rank of Senior Manager - Scale III
4.4.1.4. If no such employee is available, an employee from adjoining Zones / NBGs / other Offices of the Bank should be nominated.
4.4.2. Not less than two members from amongst the employees in the NBG / Zone preferably committed to the cause of women or have experience in social work/legal knowledge. If no such employees are available, employees from adjoining Zones / NBGs / Offices should be nominated.
4.4.3. One member from amongst non-governmental organizations or associations committed to the cause of women or a person familiar with the issues relating to sexual harassment. They shall be paid such fees or allowances for holding the proceedings of the Internal Committee as prescribed by the Bank from time to time
4.4.4. It shall be ensured that members of the Internal Committee are unbiased and minimum 50% of the members are women.
4.4.5. Although the Act does not provide for the minimum numbers of the Internal Committee, it would be advisable to have minimum 5 (five) members in the committee.
4.4.6. The presiding Officer and every Member of the Internal Committee shall hold office for a period not exceeding 3 years from the date of their nomination. If for any reasons, a new person is to be nominated / substituted to the Committee, it should be ensured that such new person has the required eligibility as mentioned above.
4.4.7. The Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee shall be removed from the Committee on the following grounds:-
4.4.7.1. He / She contravenes the provisions of section 16 of Act i.e. Prohibition of Publication / making known the contents of complaint / inquiry; or
4.4.7.2. He / She has been convicted for an offence or an inquiry into an offence under any law for the time being in force is pending against him / her; or
4.4.7.3. He / She has been found guilty in any disciplinary proceedings or a disciplinary proceeding is pending against him / her; or
4.4.7.4. He / She has so abused his / her position as to render his / her continuance in office prejudicial to the public interest; or
4.4.7.5. He / She Fails to maintain confidentiality and publishes, communicates or makes known to the public, press and media or any other person (a) the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman, respondent and witnesses (b) any information relating to conciliation (c) enquiry proceedings (d)recommendations of the Committee as the case may be;
4.4.7.6. And the vacancy so created or any casual vacancy shall be filled by fresh nomination in accordance with the provisions of Section 4 of the Act.

4.5. The Internal Committee is not only responsible for receiving complaints and acting upon them but; instead, the purpose of having the IC is to prevent such acts against women employees and take actions to curb this evil. The committee should act proactively towards awareness of the employees and prevent such acts before even it's in the minds of any respondent.


4.6. ZO IC will enquire / investigate into all such complaints against employees (also refer Annexure III)
4.6.1. Working under jurisdiction of the Zone and other offices in the geographical area including LCBs, Training Centers, and Zonal Audit Offices.
4.6.2. All award staff & officers upto Scale V.
4.6.3. However, if the complainant / respondent (upto Scale V) is not posted under the jurisdiction / area of same Zonal Office, then the ZO IC of the concerned Zonal Office under whose jurisdiction / area the complainant is posted will enquire into the complaint.

4.7. NBG IC will enquire / investigate into all such complaints against employees (also refer Annexure III)
4.7.1. Working under NBG office
4.7.2. All officers of Scale VI working under the jurisdiction / area of the NBG
4.7.3. Complaints referred by the ZO IC in exigent cases.
4.7.4. However, if the complainant / respondent (Scale VI) is not posted under the jurisdiction of same NBG, then the NBG IC of the NBG under whose jurisdiction the complainant is posted will enquire into the complaint.

4.8. HO IC may enquire / investigate into all such complaints against employees (also refer Annexure III)
4.8.1. Working under Head Office
4.8.2. All officers of Scale VII & above, working anywhere for the Bank
4.8.3. All employees who are not covered in any of the cases above.
4.8.4. Complaints referred by the NBG IC in exigent cases.

4.9. Chief General Manager / General Manager (HR), General Manager (NBG), Zonal Manager shall not be a member of the HO IC or of the concerned NBG / Zone.

4.10. Chief General Manager / General Manager (HR) may advise IC of another Zone or NBG or HO to investigate into such complaints pertaining to other Zone / NBG, if the exigencies so require.

4.11. Meetings of the IC:
4.11.1. Periodicity: Committee will meet at least quarterly or earlier as per requirements or if a complaint of serious nature warranting immediate action is received.
4.11.2. Presiding Officer and Members would decide on the seriousness of the complaint for such an emergency meeting.
4.11.3. Quorum: Minimum 3 Members of the Committee shall be the quorum including Presiding Officer.

4.12. Nodal Point: HR Department at Head Office, NBG, and Zonal Office respectively shall be the nodal point for receiving the complaints and for convening the meetings of the IC.


5. COMPLAINT FILING

5.1. A complaint of sexual harassment can be filed in writing within a time limit of 3 months from the date of incident and in case of a series of incidents, within a period of 3 months from the date of last alleged incident. This may be extended to another 3 months  by the Internal  Committee if  the Committee is satisfied about the


circumstances which prevented the aggrieved women from filing the complaint within the stipulated period.

5.2. Where such complaint cannot be made in writing, the Presiding Officer or any Member of the Internal Committee as the case may be, shall render all reasonable assistance to the aggrieved woman for making the complaint in writing.

5.3. Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a complaint on account of her physical incapacity or death or otherwise, a complaint may be filed by -
5.3.1. her legal heir; or
5.3.2. her relative or friend; or
5.3.3. co-worker / any person who has knowledge of the incident with the written consent of the aggrieved woman; or
5.3.4. An officer of the National Commission for Women or State Women's Commission; or

5.4. Where the aggrieved woman is unable to make a complaint on account of her mental incapacity, a complaint may be filed by -
5.4.1. her relative or friend; or
5.4.2. A Special educator; or
5.4.3. A qualified psychiatrist or psychologist; or
5.4.4. The guardian or authority under whose care she is receiving treatment or care; or
5.4.5. Any person who has knowledge of the incident jointly with her relative or friend or a special educator or qualified psychiatrist or psychologist or guardian or authority under whose care she is receiving treatment or care.

5.5. An aggrieved woman may submit the complaint addressing the same to Presiding Officer, Internal Committee. The complainant shall submit the complaint in writing along with the supporting documents, names and addresses of the witness/es in support of her complaint. Nodal Officer should guide the complainant in that regard. A Specimen format for submitting the complaint is attached as Annexure V.

5.6. Bank shall provide assistance to the aggrieved woman if she so chooses to file a complaint in relation to the offence under the XYZn Penal Code (45 of 1860) or any other law for the time being in force.

5.7. Bank shall also cause to initiate action, against the perpetrator, or if the aggrieved woman so desires, where the perpetrator is not an employee, in the workplace at which the incident of sexual harassment took place.


6. BOI - SHe Box

6.1. The BOI Sexual Harassment electronic Box (BOI - She Box) is an effort of the Bank to enable any woman employee facing sexual harassment to register their complaint through our HRMS portal.

6.2. Although the complaints can be filed in any form viz. offline or online, it is suggested to fill the complaints through HRMS to so that the complaint is directed towards the proper channel for resolution.


6.3. For registering complaints through the BOI - SHe-Box, the complainant needs to visit the HRMS Portal, and fill up the relevant columns. If complainant is different from the aggrieved woman;
6.3.1. If complainant is an employee, he / she can file the complaint through HRMS on behalf of the aggrieved woman after obtaining her written consent;
6.3.2. If the complainant is not an employee, he / she should submit the hard copy of the complaint to the HR Department of the concerned Zone / NBG or to the Presiding Officer or any member of the IC as per Point No. 5.5.

6.4. Complaints received in Offline mode by Zones / NBG / IC needs to be entered in BOI - She Box, HRMS portal by the HR Departments of the Zones / NBG as per the rights provided in HRMS.

6.5. Once the complaint is resolved and recommendations of the IC are implemented, the same also needs to be updated in HRMS for proper data collection / onward reporting.

6.6. A register similar to Annexure IV will also be developed in HRMS for record keeping and other purposes.


7. RESOLUTION

7.1. Dealing with incidents of sexual harassment is not like any other type of dispute. Complainants may be embarrassed and distressed and it requires tact and discretion while receiving the complaint. IC should make enquiry into the complaints in accordance with the principles of natural justice and should give opportunity of being heard to both the parties.

7.2. Complainant / Respondent is allowed to consult another person outside the Bank if they wish. But bringing a legal advisor / lawyer to the enquiry proceedings / meetings is prohibited under this Act.

7.3. Internal Committee should maintain registers at their level and every complaint received should be entered into the register meticulously. Refer to Annexure IV for Format of the Register to be maintained.

7.4. The Internal Committee should acknowledge the complaints so received immediately, and initiate the further investigation / action process by issuing notice, in any case within 7 working days of receipt of such complaint. The respondent should also be informed within this time that a complaint has been received.

7.5. The Respondent shall file reply to the complaint along with the list of documents, names and addresses of witness/es in support of his views within period not exceeding ten (10) working days from the date of receipt of documents from the Internal Committee. If the reply of respondent is not received within the stipulated period, IC will proceed further in the matter.

7.6. Resolution procedure through Conciliation
7.6.1. The Internal Committee at the request of the aggrieved woman takes steps to settle the matter between the aggrieved woman and the respondent through conciliation
7.6.2. However, no monetary settlement shall be made a basis of conciliation.


7.6.3. Where a settlement has been arrived at, the Internal Committee shall record the settlement so arrived duly signed by both the parties and provide the copy of settlement to the parties.
7.6.4. Further, the same shall be forwarded
7.6.4.1. Zonal Manager - In case of ZO IC;
7.6.4.2. General Manager (NBG) - In case of NBG IC;
7.6.4.3. General Manager (HR) - In case of HO IC;
7.6.4.4. to take action within a period of not more than 60 days as specified in the recommendations.
7.6.5. Where a settlement is arrived at, no further inquiry shall be conducted by the Internal Committee.
7.6.6. However, if any of the condition of the settlement is not complied with by the respondent, the complainant can go back to the IC who will proceed to make an inquiry.

7.7. Resolution procedure through formal inquiry
7.7.1. While conducting inquiry, minimum three members of the Internal Committee, including Presiding Officer as the case may be, should be present. The Internal Committee shall, where the respondent is an employee, proceed to make inquiry into the complaint in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the respondent.
7.7.2. If the respondent is not an employee of our Bank, and if prima facie case exist, IC should proceed to make inquiry into the complaint and request for cooperation of the respondent; if respondent is not cooperating in the inquiry proceedings, request to be made to his employer or business partners / colleagues for cooperation of the respondent; and if necessary forward the complaint to the police, immediately for registering the case under section 509 of the XYZn Penal Code (45 of 1860), and any other relevant provisions of the said Code where applicable, in consultation with Legal Department of concerned office. Necessary assistance may be extended to the aggrieved women if she chooses to file police complaint.
7.7.3. The Internal Committee is required to complete the inquiry within a time period of 90 days and a final report submitted to the concerned office within ten days thereafter. The concerned office as detailed in Point No. 7.6.4 is obliged to act on the recommendations within 60 days. The report should be sent to the employer / business partners / police as the case may be in cases where the respondent is not an employee of the Bank to take the appropriate action as per the Act. The parties shall during the course of inquiry, be given an opportunity of being heard and a copy of the findings shall be made available to both the parties enabling them to make representation against the findings before the Committee.
7.7.4. For the purpose of conducting enquiry the "Internal Committee" are vested with the same powers, as that of Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 while trying a suit in respect of the following -
7.7.4.1. summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on oath;
7.7.4.2. requiring the discovery and production of documents;
7.7.4.3. any other matter which may be prescribed.
7.7.5. The Zones / NBGs / Offices shall provide necessary facilities to the Internal Committee for dealing with the complaint and conducting an inquiry and shall also assist in securing the attendance of respondent and witnesses before the Internal Committee. Further, it shall make available such information to the Internal Committee as it may require having regard to the complaint.


7.7.6. Where the Internal Committee arrives at the conclusion that the allegation against the respondent has not been proved, it shall recommend to the concerned office that no action is required to be taken in the matter.
7.7.7. In case the complaint has been found proved then the Committee shall recommend:
7.7.7.1. To concerned authority to take action in accordance with the provisions as applicable to the respondent as the case may be.
7.7.7.2. To concerned authority to deduct an appropriate sum from the salary of the respondent or direct the respondent to pay such sum to the aggrieved women in terms of Section 13 (3) (ii) of the Act.
7.7.7.3. In case the Bank is unable to make such deductions from the salary of the respondent due to his being absent or cessation of employment, the IC may direct to the respondent to pay such sums to the aggrieved woman.
7.7.7.4. In case the respondent fails to pay the sum, the IC may forward the order for recovery of the sum to the General Manager (HR) / General Manager (NBG)/ Zonal Manager who will act upon the recommendations of IC within 60 days
7.7.8. For the purpose of determining the sums to be paid to the aggrieved woman, the Internal Committee, shall have regard to:
7.7.8.1. The mental trauma, pain, suffering and emotional distress caused to the aggrieved woman;
7.7.8.2. The loss in the career opportunity due to the incident of sexual harassment;
7.7.8.3. Medical expenses incurred by the victim for physical or psychiatric treatment:
7.7.8.4. The income and financial status of the respondent;
7.7.8.5. Feasibility of such payment in lump sum or in instalments.

7.8. IC shall have the right to terminate the inquiry proceedings or to give an ex parte decision on the complaint, if the complainant or respondent fails, without sufficient cause, to present herself or himself for three consecutive hearings convened by the Presiding Officer of IC. Provided that such termination or ex-parte order may not be passed without giving a notice in writing, fifteen days in advance to the party concerned.

7.9. Where the Internal Committee arrives at a conclusion that the allegation against the respondent is malicious or the aggrieved woman making the complaint has made the complaint knowing it to be false or the aggrieved woman making the complaint has produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the concerned Disciplinary Authority if such women is our employee, to take action against such woman in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to her. The disciplinary action against such employee / complainant may include but not limited to a written apology, warning, reprimand or censure, withholding promotion, withholding of pay rise or increments, terminating from service or undergoing a counselling session. However, mere inability to prove the case will not attract penalty under this provision. Provided further that, the malicious intent on part of the complainant shall be established after an inquiry in accordance with the procedure prescribed, before any action is recommended.

7.10. Where the Internal Committee arrives at a conclusion that during the inquiry any witness has given false evidence or produced any forged or misleading document, it may recommend to the concerned Disciplinary Authority in case such witness is our employee / employer of the witness to take action in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said witness.


7.11. Internal Committee is also empowered to forward the complaint to police so that only genuine cases come to fore and it acts as a deterrent to false complaints.

7.12. Upon inquiry in the matter, if IC finds that apart from offence of sexual harassment, there exists a prima facie case of commission of criminal offence in the complaint, it may recommend filing of criminal complaint against the Respondent.


8. INTERIM RELIEF

8.1. During the pendency of an inquiry, on a written request made by the aggrieved woman, the Internal Committee, if so satisfied, may recommend to General Manager (HR) / General Manager (NBG) / Zonal Manager / concerned office to
8.1.1. Transfer the aggrieved woman or the respondent to any other workplace; or
8.1.2. Grant leave to the aggrieved woman up to a period of three months; or
8.1.3. Grant such other relief to the aggrieved woman as may be prescribed.
8.1.4. To remove the Respondent as appraiser, reviewer or acceptor for the complainant forthwith, with respect to performance appraisal of the complainant and assign the same to some other officer or vice versa.
8.1.5. To remove the Respondent as reporting authority, if the Respondent has been reporting authority for work of complainant or vice versa.
8.1.6. The leave granted to the aggrieved woman under this provision shall be in addition to the leave she would be otherwise entitled. On the recommendations of the Internal Committee, the concerned office shall implement the above recommendations and send the report of such implementation to the Internal Committee.


9. NON DISCLOSURE

9.1. The contents of the complaint, the identity and addresses of the aggrieved woman, respondent and witnesses, any information relating to conciliation and inquiry proceedings, recommendations of the Internal Committee, and the action taken by the Bank under the provisions of the Act shall not be published, communicated or made known to the public, press and media in any manner or under any act even including under Right to Information (RTI) Act, 2005 or court of law until and unless there is a specific order from the court concerned.

9.2. If any information is required to be provided to the court or to any judicial authority or any Commission established under provisions of Constitution of XYZ or the police/CBI authorities such information shall be given in sealed Cover under proper acknowledgement.

9.3. The information may be disseminated regarding the justice secured to any victim of sexual harassment under this Act without disclosing the name, address, identity or any other particulars calculated to lead to the identification of the aggrieved woman and witnesses.

9.4. Where any person entrusted with the duty to handle or deal with the complaint, inquiry or any recommendations or action to be taken under the provisions of the Act, contravenes the above provision (section 16 of the Act), he shall be liable for penalty


in accordance with the provisions of the service rules applicable to the said person or where no such service rules exist, in such manner as may be prescribed.


10. DELEGATION

10.1. In order to deal with various provisions under the Act, in effective manner and also to facilitate faster and speedy disposal of the related matters, it has been approved by the Competent Authority that, powers to exercise the functions under the various sections of the aforesaid Act may be delegated to various authorities. We, accordingly, enclose an Annexure I, specifying therein duly approved / nominated authorities, who can exercise the delegated powers under the various sections/provisions of the aforesaid Act. It is clarified that, in all other cases/provisions wherein no delegated authority is specified/nominated or not covered in the enclosed Annexure I, the said powers are delegated to the General Manager (HR), Head Office so that decisions in the matter can be taken promptly and decided expeditiously. In case of any clarification the matter may be referred to the General Manager (H.R.), Industrial Relations Division, Human Resources Department, Head office.


11. APPEALS

11.1. Procedure to Appeal against the Findings of IC and further legal remedies:
11.1.1. Any person including the Respondent, complainant, the witness who is aggrieved by the recommendations of IC may file an appeal before the Appellate Authority as per Annexure II.
11.1.2. The appeal may be filed against acceptance of the recommendations within 90 days from the date of the recommendations. The appeal so made shall be disposed of by the Appellate Authorities mentioned above as early as possible, but not later than 90 days of such filing. The Appellate Authority may take an independent view and may either concur with the findings of the IC or may order reinvestigation into the matter by higher / separate committee.
11.1.3. Any person further aggrieved by the decision of the Appellate Authority to implement or otherwise of the recommendations of IC may pursue such further legal remedies as are available under applicable law.
11.1.4. However, the appeal should not be the reason to delay the implementation of the recommendations of the IC. And the same should be implemented within 60 days by the concerned authority as detailed in the point 7.6.4.

12. GENDER NEUTRALITY

12.1 There is a rise in Sexual Harassment cases against other genders too. Hence, to make the policy more gender neutral, this policy will also be applicable to employees of other genders also who are employed by the Bank for any work on regular basis including the probationers.

12.2 The lnternal Committee shall also Iook into the matters related to the complaints from other genders. lt is advised to include more members from other genders also in the committee keeping provisions of the Act intact.


13. GENERAL POINTS

13.1. All Internal Committees shall submit Annual reports to the Head Office, HR Department, IR Division. A module in HRMS will be developed for the above reporting purpose. The reporting calendar under this Act would be from January to December of every year with the following details:-
13.1.1. No. of complaints received in the year;
13.1.2. No. of complaints disposed of in the year;
13.1.3. No. of cases pending for more than 90 days;
13.1.4. No. of workshops or awareness programmes against sexual harassment carried out by Zone / NBG on standalone basis or through the Training Centers;
13.1.5. Nature of action taken.

13.2. The Annual Report of the Bank shall include the number of cases filed, if any, & their disposal under this Policy.

13.3. Dealing of complaints in case of retirement / VRS / resignation of complainant or respondent:
13.3.1. The process of inquiry and proceedings with respect to complaints of sexual harassment or appeals must be expedited to ensure timely conclusion of the case.
13.3.2. In case, the proceedings are pending and any employee concerned with the case is about to be relieved because of retirement / VRS / resignation, the terminal benefits of the employee should be kept on hold including pension till the completion of proceedings and relieving letter should not be provided to the employee.
13.3.3. In case, the complainant / respondent has retired or got relieved prior to the intimation of the case, IC should try and hold the proceedings as per the laid down procedures, if the same is not possible, other provisions of the law should be explored and due provisions should be implemented in consultation with the legal department.

13.4. The Policy will be reviewed after three years except in the light of any statutory requirement. Notwithstanding, the Bank reserves the right to review, modify and amend the policy whenever deemed necessary.

13.5. Bank may make any alteration or amendment or rescind any of the clauses of this Policy as and when it finds it necessary to do so as long as it complies the Act. And nothing contained in this Policy shall operate in derogation of any law for the time being in force or to the prejudice of any right of any employee under any other Rules or Law.


Annexure I


DELEGATION UNDER THE POLICY

Sr.
No.
Sections / Rules under the Act
Subject
Competent Authority
1.
Section 4
Constitution of Internal Committee
For nomination, selection and
removal


At Head Office Level
General Manager (HR)


At NBGs
General Manager(NBG)


At Zonal level / LCBs / Audit Offices / Training Colleges situated in the geographical area
Zonal Manager


In any other cases not covered above
General Manager (HR)
2.
Rule 3
Fees or allowances for the members of Internal Committee appointed from amongst Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) (Rs.200/- per day for holding the proceedings) and also the reimbursement of travel cost.
For Approval / Sanction


At Head Office Level
General Manager (HR)


At NBGs
General Manager(NBG)


At Zonal level / LCBs / Audit Offices / Training Colleges situated in the
geographical area
Zonal Manager


In any other cases not covered above
General Manager (HR)
3.
Section 12
Grant of Leave - In all cases
General Manager (HR)


Transfer of aggrieved woman / respondent and grant of other relief to the aggrieved woman as prescribed under the act



At Head Office Level
General Manager (HR)


At NBGs
General Manager(NBG)


At Zonal level / LCBs / Audit Offices / Training Colleges situated in that
geographical area
Zonal Manager


In any other cases not covered above
General Manager (HR)
4.
Section 13/15
Determination and deductions from salary / wages of respondent - at all
levels
General Manager (HR)
5.
Section 22
Annual Report of the organization - A consolidated report will be submitted to the Appropriate Government that may be notified by the
Government under the aforesaid Act.
General Manager (HR)


In all other cases where the provisions of Service rules are applicable
Authorities will be as per the Bipartite Settlements and the Bank of XYZ Officer Employees' (Discipline and Appeal) Regulations, 1976, as the
case may be



Annexure II


DELEGATION UNDER THE POLICY FOR APPEALS

Aggrieved Party
Decision by
Appellate Authority
Award Staff and Officers working under the jurisdiction / area of Zones
ZO IC
General Manager (NBG)
Award Staff and Officers working under the jurisdiction of NBGs
NBG IC
General Manager (HR)
Award Staff and Officers posted at HO
HO IC
Chief	General	Manager (HR)
Staff not satisfied by the decisions of GM (NBG) or GM (HR)
ZO IC / NBG IC / HO IC
Chief	General	Manager (HR)  /  Executive  Director
(In-charge of HR)



Annexure III

JURISDICTION OF INTERNAL COMMITTEE

Internal Committee
(IC)
Enquire / Investigate Complaints against employees
Remarks


Zonal IC
All Award Staff and Officers upto Scale V, working under the
jurisdiction of the Zone

If the complainant / respondent is not posted under the jurisdiction / area of same Zonal Office, then the ZO IC of the concerned Zonal Office under whose jurisdiction / area the complainant is posted will enquire into the complaint.

All Award Staff and Officers upto Scale V, working in LCBs, Zonal Audit Offices, Training Centers, other offices in the geographical area of the Zone.
Nearest Zonal Office / NBG Office should be referred for complaints (If there are 2 or more offices in the vicinity,
decision of filing the complaint lies with the complainant)

NBG IC
All employees Working under the NBG Office
If the complainant / respondent is not posted under the jurisdiction / area of same NBG, then the NBG IC of the concerned NBG under whose jurisdiction / area the complainant is posted will enquire into the complaint.

All officers of Scale VI working under the Jurisdiction /
geographical area of the NBG


Complaints referred by the ZO IC in exigent cases


HO IC
All employees Working under the HO
Chief General Manager / General Manager (HR) may advise IC of another Zone or NBG or HO to investigate into such complaints pertaining to other Zone / NBG, if the exigencies so require.

All officers of Scale VII & above working anywhere for the Bank


All employees who are not covered in any of the cases
above.


Complaints referred by the NBG IC in exigent cases.





Annexure IV

FORMAT FOR REGISTER TO BE MAINTAINED BY INTERNAL COMMITTEE


  Date of Complaint
  Name of Complainant
Complainant's Branch / Office
  Name of Respondent
 Respondent's Branch / Office
Professional Relationship between Complainant & Respondent
Date of submission of the Report by IC

Annexure V

COMPLAINT FORMAT
(Any information / details provided by the Aggrieved Person shall be kept confidential)

Details of the Aggrieved Person
Name

Designation with PF Number

Branch / Department / Zone / NBG / Office

Contact Number

Address (office)

(If applicable) Details of Complainant who is filling the form on behalf of the Aggrieved
Person
Name

Relationship with Aggrieved Person

Designation with PF Number (if Complainant
is an employee)

Branch / Department / Zone / NBG / Office
(if Complainant is an employee)

Contact number

Address (office where the complainant works)

Reason for which Aggrieved Individual is unable to file the complaint
Physical incapacity Mental incapacity Death
Any other reason	(Specify in next row)
Specify the Reason

Details of the Respondent
Name

Designation with PF Number (if respondent is an employee)

Branch / Department / Zone / NBG / Office
(if respondent is an employee)

Contact Number

Address (place of work of the respondent)

Details of the Incident

Description of the incident (Use separate sheets if required)




Other details (if the incident was repeated / any previous related incident)

Date and Time of the Incident / Incidents

Witnesses
1.

2.

3.

4.
Details of any documents available (E.g. Messages, email, letter etc)

Details of any persons contacted by the
aggrieved individual after the incident (If any)

Any other relevant information / comments





Signature of the Aggrieved Person Date:



Name and Signature of the complainant (If applicable) Date:

Please note: Signature of the Aggrieved Person / Complainant is required on the bottom of every sheet.
















HR POLICY MANUAL
     SECTION 01: WORK ENVIRONMENT & CULTURE CHAPTER 06: PROTECTION AGAINST HARASSMENT POLICY







Private & Confidential - For Bank Use Only
The information furnished in this document contains restricted and/or privileged information and is intended only for authorized use of the Bank's employees. No part or parts of this document may be used, reproduced or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including recording or the use of any information storage and retrieval system, without written permission of the Bank

Table of Contents
6.1 INTRODUCTION	1
6.2 OBJECTIVE:	1
6.3 SCOPE:	1
6.4 GUIDING PRINCIPLES:	1
6.5 MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE:	2
6.6 INQUIRY COMMITTEE/OFFICER:	2
6.7 CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PROTECTION AGAINST HARASSMENT	3
6.8 LIST OF MAJOR AND MINOR PENALITIES	3
6.9 DEFINITION	4


Chapter 06: Protection Against Harassment Policy
6.1 INTRODUCTION:
A safe, respectful and harmonious workplace means a workplace which is free of harassment, abuse of authority, retaliation and discrimination. These elements jointly or separately constitute 'abusive conduct'.
The policy shall provide details of the responsibilities of the Bank as an employer and of the Employees/Individuals/External Service Providers for promoting professional, safe and harmonious workplace environment.
This policy shall follow the theme and provisions as defined in the applicable laws, rules and regulations   issued by the government/regulatory authorities from time to time.
This policy document will supersede all relevant Circulars, Memorandums, Addendums, Amendments, Instructions, Letters or any other correspondence issued earlier (if any).

6.2 OBJECTIVE:
The purpose of the policy is to provide and put in place mechanism to ensure a workplace which is free of harassment (inclusive of sexual harassment), abuse of authority, retaliation and discrimination. This policy is focused to;
a) To promote a harmonized and respectful work environment.
b) To ensure an enabling and safe environment for all employees;
c) To take appropriate action against any inappropriate, aggressive, micro aggressive behavior at work place, thus making it a dignified environment for all employees.
All allegations shall be promptly investigated and resolved at the earliest in accordance with and according to the defined parameters.

6.3 SCOPE:
The Policy has been developed to ensure zero tolerance against harassment and gender discrimination and shall be applicable to all Employees/ Individuals/ External Service Provider in any way affiliated with the bank (as per definitions specified in the below part of the policy), who have experienced or witnessed any type of harassment at the workplace including, abuse of authority, retaliation, and gender discrimination.
The complaint will not qualify as harassment, if it is not related to instances of sexual harassment or gender discrimination in terms of the Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act, 2010.

6.4 GUIDING PRINCIPLES:
a) According to Protection against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act, 2010 & amendments in the Act from time to time, the management shall be responsible to follow Code of Conduct for protection against harassment of any Employee at the workplace in letter & spirit in order to implement the provisions and ensure that each complaint

relating to such conduct is addressed responsibly through fair, impartial and just Inquiry process without any retaliation or victimization towards the complainant or the witnesses of the incident.
b) All Employees/Individuals/External Service Providers shall take reasonable measures to prevent and discourage any type of abusive conduct at the workplace.
c) Any employee who violates this policy shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action, and will be penalized as per Bank's policies & procedures, applicable laws, rules and regulations issued by the government from time to time.
d) The disciplinary action shall also be taken against the complainant making false grievance or concocting a false/fabricated story to achieve ulterior motives.
e) Inquiry proceedings (including any statement, information, record, documents evidence, and findings) related to the complaint filed/incident shall be strictly treated as confidential. Reasonable care and standard should be exercised for protecting the privacy of the entire incident, while deciding the case in fair and equitable.
f) Anonymous and pseudonymous complaints through any means (written, electronic or oral) shall not be entertained.
g) In case the complainant/accused is in trauma, access shall be arranged for both to get medical and/or psychological support by a psychologist /staff counsellor at any point after the alleged incident/s in case of recommendation by the respective committee, Additional Medical leave may also be granted if required.
h) The process flow for handling of Harassment cases is attached as Annex-I.

6.5 MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE:
The nominated Management Committee I.e. Disciplinary, Harassment and Grievance Committee (DHAGC), shall be responsible for resolution of all cases under this policy. The TORs of nominated Management Committee will cover its scope.

6.6 INQUIRY COMMITTEE/OFFICER:
The Inquiry Committee/Officer shall be constituted upon recommendation of nominated Management Committee to probe the cases under this policy. Inquiry Committee shall consist of three members from whom at least one member shall be a female, while one member shall be from senior management.
If the Inquiry Committee finds the accused to be guilty, they shall recommend to the Management Committee for imposing penalties (major or minor). In case the Management Committee does not agree with the recommendations proposed by the Inquiry Committee, it may send back the case with its observations for recommendations afresh
A new person will be appointed as member of the inquiry committee if;
(i) any person resigns from membership of the Inquiry Committee owing to his or her transfer or leaves the organization; or

(ii) a person is not able to perform their functions as member of the Inquiry Committee due to any other reasonable clause; or
(iii) there is a complaint against a particular member of Inquiry Committee to avoid any conflict of interest.

6.7 CODE OF CONDUCT FOR PROTECTION AGAINST HARASSMENT:
The Code of Conduct as outlined in the Schedule to the Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act ,2010 (Section 2 (c)), and in pursuance of Section 11, is hereby incorporated into and shall be considered as an integral part of this Policy. The Code of Conduct is attached with this Policy as Annex-II.

6.8 LIST OF MAJOR AND MINOR PENALITIES:
As per the Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act, 2010 below mentioned are minor and major penalties.
(i) Minor penalties:
a. censure;
b. withholding, for a specific period, promotion or increment;
c. stoppage, for a specific period, at an efficiency bar in the time-scale, otherwise than for unfitness to cross such bar; and
d. recovery of the compensation payable to the complainant from pay or any other source of the accused;
(ii) Major penalties:
a. reduction to a lower post or time-scale, or to a lower stage in a time-scale;
b. compulsory retirement;
c. removal from service;
d. dismissal from service; and
e. Fine. A part of the fine can be used as compensation for the complainant. In case of the owner, the fine shall be payable to the complainant.
However, the Bank has devised the Levels of Punishment listed below, taking into account the severity of the offense and with reference to the Act of 2010.

Level
Punishment

Level - I
* Dismissal from Service.
* Termination from service.
* Removal from services, including compulsory retirement from service.

Level - II
* Demotion to a lower grade.
* Reversion to a lower post.
* Reduction to pay.
* Performance Improvement Plan.





Level - III
* Stoppage of Bonus/Promotion/Increments for specified period of time. Stoppage of any one or all of these can be option.
* Recovery from the salary of the whole or part of any, pecuniary loss caused to the Bank by the employee / monetary fine.
* Transfer of service/ Change of assignment.
* Barring to hold key positions for some specified period or permanently.
* Letter of Stern Warning.
* Performance Improvement Plan.
Level - IV
* Letter of Warning.
* Letter of caution.
* Performance Improvement Plan.
6.9 DEFINITION:
6.9.1 "Act 2010": The Protection Against Harassment of Women at the Workplace Act, 2010 as amended from time to time.
6.9.2 "Harassment": "Harassment" means any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors, stalking or cyber stalking on any digital space/forum or other verbal, visual or written communication or physical conduct of a sexual nature or sexually demeaning attitudes, including any gestures and expressions conveying derogatory connotation, causing interference with work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive work environment, or the attempt to punish the complainant for refusal to comply to such a request or is made a condition for employment; or discrimination on the basis of gender, which may or may not be sexual in nature, but which embody a discriminatory and prejudicial mind-set or notion, resulting in discriminatory behavior on basis of gender against the complainant.
6.9.3 "Abuse of Authority": A demand by a person in authority, such as a supervisor, for sexual favors in order for the complainant to keep or obtain certain job benefits, be it a wage increase, a promotion, training opportunity, a transfer or the job itself.
6.9.4 "Abusive Conduct": For the purpose of this policy: Harassment, Abuse of Authority, Retaliation and Discrimination shall collectively be referred to as "Abusive Conduct".
6.9.5 "Employee": Means a person who is employed by BOP under any type of Employment agreement that may include Employees on Probation, Regular/Confirmed, Contractual (Inclusive of Fixed Term) appointed on BOP Letter of Appointment under BOP Policies/Service Rules.
6.9.6 "Individual": Means a person having an established working relationship with BOP which may include but is not limited to customer, vendor or consultant.
6.9.7 "External Service Provider": Means and includes any employee of a third party resourcing company, not included in the definition of the employee, providing services to the Bank

as an external resource without any linkage in terms of service contract, employment and payroll with the Bank
6.9.8 "Complainant/Reporting	Person":	"Complainant"	means	an Employee/individual/External Service Provider who has made a complaint to the concerned Inquiry Committee on being aggrieved by an act of harassment
6.9.9 "Alleged Accused / Respondent": An Employee/Employer/Individuals/External Service Providers (through their respective employer) who's alleged conduct is subject of a complaint.
6.9.10 "Focal Person": Staff designated as P&OE partners in the regions across Pakistan shall be the focal person for reporting purposes.
6.9.11 "Workplace": Means the place of work or any place where employee/s of the Bank gather for official or unofficial services, including but not limited to office premises, educational institutions, gigs, concerts, studios, performance facilities, courts, highways, sporting facilities, gymnasiums, visits and ceremonies.
6.9.12 "Retaliation": The refusal to grant a sexual favor can result in retaliation, which may include limiting the employee's options for future promotions or training, distorting the evaluation reports, generating gossip against the employee or other ways of limiting access to his/her rights. Such behavior is also a part of the harassment.
Retaliation is in general defined as any kind of negative action against a current or former employee that takes the form of punishment, and creates a hostile, threatening or uncomfortable environment as a result of their reported complaint.
6.9.13 "Creating a Hostile Environment": Any unwelcome sexual advance, request for sexual favors, or other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature, which interferes with an individual's work performance or creates an intimidating, hostile, abusive or offensive work environment; or any discrimination on basis of gender, which may or may not be sexual in nature, but which may embody a discriminatory and prejudicial mind-set or notion resulting in discriminatory behavior on basis of gender.
The typical "hostile environment" claim, in general, requires finding of a pattern of offensive conduct, however, in cases where the harassment is particularly severe, such as in cases involving physical contact or gender- based discrimination, a single offensive incident will constitute a violation.

















































